                                                   Review on Ranking and Selection: A New Perspective∗

                                                                                        L. Jeff Hong
                                                  School of Management and School of Data Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China
                                                                                    hong liu@fudan.edu.cn

                                                                                        Weiwei Fan†
                                                           Advanced Institute of Business, Tongji University, Shanghai 200092, China




arXiv:2008.00249v3 [math.OC] 14 Mar 2021
                                                                                      wfan@tongji.edu.cn

                                                                                          Jun Luo‡
                                           Antai College of Economics and Management, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030, China
                                                                                      jluo ms@sjtu.edu.cn


                                                                                      March 16, 2021




                                                                                          Abstract

                                                    In this paper, we briefly review the development of ranking and selection (R&S) in the
                                                 past 70 years, especially the theoretical achievements and practical applications in the past
                                                 20 years. Different from the frequentist and Bayesian classifications adopted by Kim and
                                                 Nelson (2006b) and Chick (2006) in their review articles, we categorize existing R&S proce-
                                                 dures into fixed-precision and fixed-budget procedures as in Hunter and Nelson (2017). We
                                                 show that these two categories of procedures essentially differ in the underlying method-
                                                 ological formulations, i.e., they are built on hypothesis-testing and dynamic-programming,
                                                 respectively. In light of this variation, we review in detail some well-known procedures in
                                                 the literature, and show how they fit into these two formulations. In addition, we discuss
                                                 the use of R&S procedures in solving various practical problems, and propose what we think
                                                 are the important research questions in the field.


                                               Keywords: ranking and selection, hypothesis testing, dynamic programming, simulation
                                           ∗
                                             This paper has been accepted by Frontiers of Engineering Management.
                                           †
                                             Weiwei Fan is the corresponding author. Email: wfan@tongji.edu.cn. Tel: 0086-21-65981165.
                                           ‡
                                             Jun Luo is the corresponding author. Email: jluo ms@sjtu.edu.cn. Tel: 0086-21-52301579.




                                                                                               1
1    Introduction

Decision-making processes often involve comparisons among a set of alternatives regarding cer-

tain performance measures. In this study, we consider such comparison problems with the goal

of selecting the best alternative, where the best is defined to have the largest (or smallest) mean

performance. This is not trivial in the stochastic environment where the mean performances of

these alternatives are unknown and have to be inferred via statistical sampling from stochastic

systems. Therefore, a selection procedure is required to determine how many samples need to

be collected from each alternative and then which alternative should be selected as the best

based on the sample information. Such selection problems are often called ranking and selection

(R&S) in the literature.

    R&S problems date back to the 1950s in agricultural and clinical applications (Bechhofer,

1954; Gupta, 1956). At that time, testing the homogeneity of multiple alternatives was common

(e.g., grain yields and drug treatments). For instance, an individual might desire to test whether

multiple grains produced the same mean yield, or whether multiple drug treatments led to the

same mean efficacy. Once the homogeneity of their means was rejected statistically, a natural

issue readily arose, that is, which one was the best. This issue was first proposed by Paulson

(1949) and triggered the early developments of R&S.

    In the 1950s, samples needed to be collected through physical experiments, e.g., agricultural

experiments and clinical trials, which might cost a long time to conduct. Thus, the experiments

were often conducted in batches. Accordingly, a considerable number of the R&S procedures

designed then were stage-wise, where the best one was selected at the end of the last stage.

Starting in the 1990s, this paradigm began to change owing to the increasing computing power.

An increasing number of experiments were conducted in computer simulation environments be-

cause it cost little time to generate samples. Through these simulations, samples were often

collected sequentially, especially when the program is executed in a single-processor environ-

ment. This sequential nature boosted the development of sequential R&S procedures. Unlike

stage-wise procedures, sequential procedures typically provide a decision rule at each time of

the sample collection process, and therefore are more efficient in most situations by taking

advantage of the interim sample information. Sequential R&S procedures are still prevalent

today.

    In recent years, another forming paradigm that considers large-scale R&S problems has


                                                2
emerged. For early applications such as agricultural problems, the number of alternatives is

relatively small. Designed for these applications, classic procedures were typically applied to

problems with fewer than 500 alternatives. However, in the modern world, we often face prob-

lems that may have thousands to tens of thousands of alternatives. For instance, in scheduling

problems, one may need to determine multiple components simultaneously, such as the jobs

to be scheduled, the values assigned to the jobs and the time when the scheduling happens.

Assuming that 50 choices are available for each component, their combination fairly leads to

a total of 125000 alternatives, which is a huge number for classic R&S procedures. Recently,

research on how to handle large-scale R&S problems has drawn significant attention. As pioneer

works, Luo and Hong (2011), Luo et al. (2015) and Ni et al. (2013, 2017) addressed large-scale

problems by adapting the classic procedures into parallel computing environments.

   Interested readers may refer to Fu and Henderson (2017) for an interesting introduction

on the history of R&S. Basically, R&S procedures provide a general tool for solving selection

problems. Therefore they are widely applicable to practical problems. Besides, many of the R&S

procedures are also easy to implement, and some of them have been embedded in commercial

simulation software packages, such as Arena and Simio.

   To organize the R&S procedures, existing review articles often categorize them into frequen-

tist and Bayesian procedures, according to the probability models used to describe the collected

samples (Chick, 2006; Kim and Nelson, 2006b; Branke et al., 2007). In this work, we take a

different perspective and categorize them into fixed-precision and fixed-budget procedures, as

in Gabillon et al. (2012) and Hunter and Nelson (2017). Particularly, fixed-precision procedures

intend to provide a desired statistical guarantee of the selected alternative being the best (or at

least close to the best), while fixed-budget procedures intend to allocate a given sampling budget

in various optimal or approximately optimal ways. To explain these two categories of proce-

dures, we show they essentially follow two different formulations, i.e., the hypothesis-testing and

dynamic-programming formulations, respectively. A number of studies in the literature have

adopted the same perspective and designed new procedures under the two formulations, e.g.,

Batur and Choobineh (2012) and Peng et al. (2018). Different from these works, the goal of this

review is to construct a unified framework for each formulation and explain how the existing

procedures fit in the framework.

   This paper only focuses on selecting the best mean.However, some related problems may



                                                3
also be categorized into R&S problems. They essentially have different combinations of goals to

achieve and performance measures used for comparisons. For instance, the goals can be ranking

all the alternatives, or selecting the top m alternatives, or selecting a subset of alternatives that

contains the best. Meanwhile, the performance measures used can be the quantile or proportion.

These problems are not covered in this study and interested readers may refer to Bechhofer et al.

(1995), Goldsman et al. (1998) and Kim and Nelson (2006b) for comprehensive reviews.

   One problem closely related to R&S is the multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem in the

machine learning literature. Both problems stemmed from Bechhofer (1954) and Paulson (1964),

and they have grown into two branches of research with different goals in designing procedures.

R&S procedures typically attempt to optimize the quality of final selection. In contrast, MAB

procedures attempt to balance the tradeoff between exploration (gathering new information on

different alternatives) and exploitation (choosing the best alternative) in the sequential sampling

process. Therefore, the MAB problem often aims to minimize cumulative regret during the

sampling process. Nonetheless, a series of works have considered the pure-exploration version

of the MAB problem, which is known as the best-arm identification (BAI) problem (Bubeck

and Cesa-Bianchi, 2012). Although BAI and R&S problems have the same goal, they typically

make different assumptions on the samples from alternatives. Particularly, the BAI problem

assumes the samples to be bounded or sub-Gaussian distributed, whereas the R&S problem

typically assumes they are Gaussian distributed with unknown variances. In this study we will

not review MAB procedures. Interested readers may refer to Even-Dar et al. (2002), Bubeck

and Cesa-Bianchi (2012), Gabillon et al. (2012), and Kaufmann and Kalyanakrishnan (2013)

for more information on MAB, and Ma and Henderson (2017) and Glynn and Juneja (2018) for

their connections to R&S procedures.

   The rest of paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we provide a comprehensive descrip-

tion on how R&S problems under fixed-precision and fixed-budget are formulated as hypothesis-

testing or dynamic-programming problems, respectively. In Sections 3 and 4, we present several

well-known fixed-precision and fixed-budget R&S procedures, and explain how they can be de-

rived under two different formulations, respectively. In Section 5, we present the procedures

designed for solving large-scale R&S problems. In Section 6, we introduce several emerging R&S

problems, followed by the discussion of some interesting future research directions in Section 7.




                                                 4
2     Two formulations for R&S

Suppose there are k ≥ 2 alternatives with mean performance µ = (µ1 , µ2 , . . . , µk ), and the

best alternative is defined to have the largest mean. For simplicity, we assume that the best

alternative is unique. The goal of R&S is to select the index of the best alternative, which

is unknown a priori. If multiple alternatives have tied best means, choosing any of these

alternatives as the best can be viewed as a correct selection.

    Evidently, the selection decision should be made based on the information collected from

samples. Ideally, we hope to select the best alternative with 100% probability. However, this

is impossible unless infinite samples can be collected. Therefore, a tradeoff exists between the

sampling budget and the precision of the selection decision. To alleviate this tradeoff, R&S

problems are often imposed with two constraints: Fixed precision and fixed budget (Hunter

and Nelson, 2017). In particular, the fixed-precision R&S problems intend to achieve a fixed

precision of selection when using as few sampling budget as possible, while the fixed-budget

R&S problems intend to optimize the precision of selection given a fixed sampling budget.

    In this section, we show that these R&S problems under the two constraints can be formu-

lated as hypothesis-testing (HT) and dynamic-programming (DP) problems, respectively. We

also illustrate some key issues in designing corresponding R&S procedures.


2.1     Fixed-precision R&S

To describe the precision of selection (i.e., the first constraint), one common way is to use

the probability that the selected alternative is the true best, which is called the probability of

correct selection (PCS). Then, under a fixed precision 1 − α (0 < α < 1 − 1/k), the goal of R&S

is to deliver a PCS guarantee as

                           
                PCS(µ ) = P Select the best alternative | µ ≥ 1 − α, ∀ µ ∈ Θ,                  (2.1)

         
where Θ = µ : µ[k] > µ[k−1] and µ[k] > µ[k−1] ≥ · · · ≥ µ[1] denote the ordered means.


2.1.1    Fixed-precision R&S formulated as hypothesis-testing

Practically, one may select any alternative as the best, and then what is needed is to tell whether

this alternative is truly the best. This suffices to detect, for any alternative j, whether it has a

                                                 5
larger mean than all the others, i.e., µj > µi for any i 6= j. In light of this, the R&S problems

essentially involve k simultaneous HTs and therefore are formulated as a multiple HT problem,


     (HTj ) :     H0j : µj ≤ max µi ,   versus       H1j : µj > max µi ,      ∀ j = 1, 2, . . . , k.   (2.2)
                              i6=j                                i6=j



Each single HTj above regards the comparison between alternative j and all the others.

   When H0j is rejected, alternative j should be selected as the best. Therefore, to select the

best alternative correctly, we only need to avoid committing the Type II error for each HTj .

To make it clear, notice that the PCS guarantee in (2.1) can be rewritten as,


 PCS(µ ) = P Reject H0j | µ ∈ H1j = 1 − P Type II Error in HTj ≥ 1 − α, for µ ∈ H1j , ∀j.
                                        



(For simplicity of the notation, we write µ ∈ Hdj (d = 0, 1), if µ satisfies the corresponding

hypothesis.) This implies that we only need to control the Type II error for all HTj in (2.2) as


                                                        ∀ µ ∈ H1j , j = 1, 2, . . . , k.
                   
                  P Type II Error in HTj ≤ α,                                                          (2.3)


   The Type I error for each HTj has been automatically controlled at the same time. Taking

the special case when there are only two alternatives for example, when (2.2) has two HTs, then

the Type I error in one HT essentially corresponds to the Type II error in the other. For the

general case, all H1j (j = 1, 2, . . . , k) compose a disjoint partition of the whole mean space Θ.

This partition indicates that any mean vector µ satisfying H0j must satisfy one of H1l (l 6= j).

Then, we are able to show


P Type I Error in HTj ≤ P Reject H1l | µ ∈ H1l = P Type II Error in HTl ≤ α, if µ ∈ H1l ,
                                                



or equivalently


                                                        ∀ µ ∈ H0j , j = 1, 2, . . . , k.
                    
                   P Type I Error in HTj ≤ α,                                                          (2.4)


   Above all, we formulate the fixed-precision R&S problem as a multiple HT problem in (2.2)

and illustrate that its precision (i.e., PCS guarantee in (2.1)) can be delivered by controlling

the Type II error for each single HTj as presented in (2.3).



                                                 6
2.1.2    The indifference-zone assumption

We next consider each HTj in (2.2) individually, and notice that its Type I and II errors need

to be controlled either directly or indirectly as discussed in Section 2.1.1. However, for a given

set of samples, simultaneously controlling both types of error probabilities might be impossible.

To show this, we connect these two error probabilities via the power function of the test, i.e.,

                                               
                                         
                                         
                                              P Type I error in HTj ,         if µj ≤ max µi ,
                                                                                           i6=j
             µ) = P Reject H0j | µ =
                   
         βj (µ
                                               
                                         1 − P Type II error in HTj ,
                                         
                                                                              if µj > max µi .
                                                                                           i6=j


For most testing procedures, the power function βj (µ ) is continuous with respective to µ . Then,

                                    
        P Type I error in HTj = 1 − P Type II error in HTj , when µj = max µi .                      (2.5)
                                                                                    i6=j



Obviously, this equation conflicts with the constraints stated in (2.3) and (2.4). Therefore, the

testing procedure satisfying (2.3) may not exist. It further reveals that in R&S problems, we

may not be able to select the best with the desired precision, when the means are sufficiently

close to each other.

   To overcome this obstacle, Bechhofer (1954) introduced a so-called indifference-zone (IZ)

parameter δ > 0, which refers to the smallest mean difference worth detecting. Given the IZ,

the R&S problems are modified to select the best alternative, when all the inferior alternatives

are outside the IZ of the best. Accordingly, the PCS guarantee in (2.1) is rewritten as


              PCS-IZ(µ ) = P Select the best alternative | µ ≥ 1 − α, ∀ µ ∈ Θδ ,
                            
                                                                                                     (2.6)


where Θδ = µ : µ[k] − δ > µ[k−1] is called the IZ. Following the same logic in Section 2.1.1,
          

this R&S problem can be reformulated as a multiple HT problem, that is


 (HTjδ )     H0j,δ : µj + δ ≤ max µi ,    versus   H1j,δ : µj − δ > max µi ,   ∀ j = 1, 2, . . . , k. (2.7)
                              i6=j                                  i6=j



We remark here that, for any mean vector µ ∈ Θδ of interest, either H0j,δ or H1j,δ is true, which

ensures the test above is well-defined.

   Given the IZ parameter δ, the corresponding power function is defined in two non-adjacent



                                                   7
sets, i.e., {µ : µj + δ ≤ maxi6=j µi } and {µ : µj − δ > maxi6=j µi }. This frees us from facing

the adjacent point, at which the Type I and II error probabilities cannot be controlled as

desired because their sum is forced to be one. Therefore, in presence of the IZ parameter, it

becomes possible to control both types of errors for each HTjδ , or the Type II errors for the

HTjδ (j = 1, 2, . . . , k). Accordingly, the R&S problems with PCS-IZ can also be tackled. In

Section 3, we will explain in detail how several representative R&S procedures are derived along

this line.


2.1.3    PCS and PGS

As stated in Section 2.1.2, the PCS guarantee in (2.1) is difficult to deliver, therefore the IZ

parameter is introduced and the R&S problems are restricted to a smaller mean vector space.

As a consequence, the PCS-IZ guarantee in (2.6) is delivered whenever the best mean is at

least δ larger than the others. However, in practice, several alternatives may have means that

fall into the indifference zone, and these alternatives are called good alternatives. According

to the definition of IZ, we should be indifferent if one of these good alternatives is selected as

the best. Hence, we may care about the probability of good selection (PGS) rather than the

original PCS, where the PGS guarantee is represented as

                             
                  PGS(µ ) = P Select a good alternative | µ ≥ 1 − α, ∀ µ ∈ Θ.                  (2.8)


In the area of multi-armed bandits, a good selection is viewed as an approximately correct

selection, and accordingly the PGS guarantee is also called the probably approximately correct

(PAC) selection guarantee (Even-Dar et al., 2006; Ma and Henderson, 2017).

    Notice that for the R&S procedures with PCS-IZ guarantee, it is natural to expect that

they could also deliver the PGS guarantee. Unfortunately, several counterexamples have been

provided (Eckman and Henderson, 2018a).

    In the following, we attempt to explain this phenomenon from the hypothesis-testing per-

spective. Similar to Section 2.1.1, to select a good alternative, it suffices to test, for any given

alternative j, whether it is a good alternative, i.e., µk + δ > maxi6=k µi . Therefore, we formulate

the R&S problems with PGS guarantee as a multiple HT problem, that is


        (HTjG )      H0j,G : µj + δ ≤ max µi    versus    H1j,G : µj + δ > max µi , ∀ j.       (2.9)
                                       i6=j                                 i6=j


                                                 8
   Suppose that a procedure with PCS-IZ guarantee of (2.6) exists, and we want to know

whether it can deliver the PGS guarantee in (2.8). According to the previous analysis, an easy

way is by checking the Type II error constraints presented in (2.3). In Table 1, we summarize the

R&S problems with different probability guarantees and their corresponding HT formulations.

Table 1 shows that H0j,G = H0j,δ . However, H1j,G refers to a larger mean vector space than

H0j,δ . Therefore, the Type II error probability in HTjG may not satisfy (2.3) even though it is

satisfied in HTjδ . In other words, the PGS guarantee can not be guaranteed. To overcome this

drawback, Eckman and Henderson (2020) constructed several sufficient conditions under which

the PGS-IZ guarantee can imply the PGS guarantee.

                             Table 1: R&S and their HT formulations.

 Goal of R&S            Means                                     HT Formulations
       PCS           µ[k] > µ[k−1]             H0j : µj ≤ max µi , v.s. H1j : µj > max µi , ∀ j
                                                          i6=j                     i6=j

      PCS-IZ       µ[k] − δ > µ[k−1]      H0j,δ : µj + δ ≤ max µi , v.s. H1j,δ : µj − δ > max µi , ∀ j
                                                           i6=j                           i6=j

       PGS           µ[k] > µ[k−1]       H0j,G : µj + δ ≤ max µi , v.s. H1j,G : µj + δ > max µi , ∀ j
                                                           i6=j                            i6=j



   On the opposite side, Table 1 depicts that PGS guarantee implies the PCS-IZ guarantee.

Thus, interest has recently emerged in developing the procedures with PGS guarantee, such as

Fan et al. (2016), Eckman and Henderson (2018a).


2.2     Fixed-budget R&S

In this section, we consider the R&S procedures under a fixed sampling budget. By its nature,

one can always select the alternative with the largest sample mean as the best when the sampling

budget is exhausted. Therefore, the key issue here is how to allocate the budget efficiently.

When the allocations can be made multiple times, one effective method is to re-determine the

allocation adaptively at each stage based on the sampling information collected so far. Thus, a

dynamic-programming (Bellman, 1966; Bertsekas, 1995) formulation looks proper to derive an

optimal allocation policy.

   Under the DP formulation, R&S problems turn into finding a sequence of sampling allocation

decisions to optimize the precision of the final selection. Besides the PCS used in Section 2.1,

another popular measure to describe the precision of selection is expected opportunity cost

(EOC). In fact, PCS is related to the so-called 0-1 loss, i.e., only a correct selection acquires


                                                9
a reward, while EOC describes the precision of selection by its opportunity cost. Particularly,

when EOC is used, a non-best selection also gets a reward proportional to the discrepancy in

the mean from the best one, which corresponds to a linear loss function. Instead of focusing on

the final selection, some researchers have chosen to optimize the way how the information has

been collected, e.g., by maximizing the expected value of information (EVI) collected at each

stage.


2.2.1    Fixed-budget R&S formulated as dynamic programming

Suppose that a total sampling budget N is allocated to the k alternatives progressively along T

stages, each endowed with a budget of τ = N/T . (In the special case when τ = 1, the samples are

allocated one by one.) Assume that, at each stage t (t = 1, 2, . . . , T ), the τ samples are collected

according to some sampling allocation policy, termed by πt . Apparently, the information about

the alternatives is revealed gradually along the sequential sampling. To track the process, we

denote E0 the initial information on the alternatives and Et the information collected up to the

end of stage t, for t = 1, 2, . . . , T . The inter-stage updating rule of the information can be

defined by a transition function ft , i.e., Et = ft (Et−1 , πt , ξt ), where ξt refers to the randomness

of the samples collected at stage t. After the final stage, the selection decision is made based

on all the information (i.e., ET ) that is collected.

   Let V (ET ) denote the terminal value function we want to optimize. For instance, when our

objective is to minimize the probability of incorrect selection (i.e., 1−PCS), the value function

can be set as the 0-1 function which is 1 if the selected alternative is not the best and 0 otherwise.

Then, the R&S procedures are formulated as a DP, which is


                                            min Eπ [V (ET )],                                     (2.10)
                                             π



where the decision is a sequence of allocation policies, i.e., π = (π1 , . . . , πT ). In the literature,

the DP problem is often handled recursively through the associated Bellman equation,


                      Vt∗ (Et ) = min E[Vt+1
                                          ∗
                                             (Et+1 )],   t = T − 1, T − 2, . . . , 0.             (2.11)
                                 πt+1



where the value function Vt∗ (Et ) defines the optimal expected cost-to-go from current stage t to

the terminal and the terminal cost VT∗ (ET ) = V (ET ).


                                                   10
   Notice that the Bellman equation builds the relationship between the value functions in the

current and next stages. As a consequence, the original DP is broken into a series of static

optimization problems, although in a stage-by-stage and recursive form. However, in practice,

the Bellman equation is typically difficult to solve and the difficulty is illustrated as follows.
                                                                 ∗ (E
To solve the Bellman equation, the next-to-terminal cost-to-go Vt+1  t+1 ) in (2.11) has to be

calculated by backward iterations. Unfortunately, these calculations tend to be increasingly

difficult as the number of stages increases due to the “curse of dimensionality”. In Section 4,

we will explain in detail how existing studies have resolved this problem and obtained the

corresponding sample allocation rules (or R&S procedures).


2.2.2    Consistency of fixed-budget procedures

With a fixed sampling budget, the DP R&S procedures provide no probability guarantee on

the correctness of selection. Alternatively, they usually process another appealing property of

consistency. A procedure is said to be consistent if its selected alternative will converge to the

true best as the total budget goes to infinity.

   The consistency of a DP procedure is generally difficult to show directly. As long as all

the alternatives receive infinite sampling budget in the limit, we will always have the exact

information on the ranking of their true means to select the best correctly. Hence, asymptoti-

cally infinite samples on all the alternatives often works as a sufficient condition to verify the

consistency of a procedure in the literature.


2.3     Connection to the frequentist and Bayesian formulations

Before this paper, the R&S procedures under fixed-precision and fixed-budget were often clas-

sified into the frequentist and Bayesian procedures in the literature (Kim and Nelson, 2006b).

The main reason is that the precision of selected alternative or generally the value function

in DP is often described under the corresponding frequentist or Bayesian probability models.

However, there are some exceptions. For instance, Frazier (2014) proposed a R&S procedure

with PCS guarantee under a Bayes-inspired framework and Chen et al. (2000) suggested a R&S

procedure with a fixed budget under a frequentist framework.

   Moreover, given that the R&S problems under fixed-precision can be formulated as a hy-

pothesis test, any testing rule, frequentist or Bayesian, can ideally be used to derive the cor-


                                                  11
responding R&S procedures. Similarly, more sample allocation (or R&S) procedures can be

derived under either a frequentist or Bayesian framework for the R&S problems under a fixed

sampling budget. Therefore, in our view, R&S procedures can be properly classified based on

their underlying methodical formulations (i.e., HT or DP).



3     Fixed-precision procedures

Considering the fixed-precision constraint, most of the existing R&S procedures are designed

under the IZ formulation and deliver the PCS-IZ guarantee in (2.6). These procedures are often

called IZ procedures. Following the discussion in Section 2.1, we will first show in detail how

the stage-wise and sequential IZ procedures are derived by addressing the corresponding HT

problem (2.7). Then we move to the newly designed IZ-free procedure which is able to deliver

both the PCS and PGS guarantees.

    Before moving to the next part, we first set up some notations. Let Xij denote the jth

observation from alternative i, for i = 1, 2, . . . , k and j = 1, 2, . . . . Unless specifically stated,

we assume these observations are independent across alternatives and {Xij : j = 1, 2, . . . } are

independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) Gaussian distribution with mean µi and variance

σi2 . Let X̄i (n) and Si2 (n) denote the sample mean and sample variance calculated based on the

first n samples from alternative i.


3.1    Stage-wise R&S procedures

We start from deriving Bechhofer’s procedure (Bechhofer, 1954), which is probably known as

the first R&S procedure in the literature. It considers a special case where the variances across

all alternatives are common and known, i.e., σ12 = σ22 = · · · = σk2 = σ 2 , and the goal is to deliver

the PCS-IZ guarantee. In this case, one natural procedure for its corresponding HT problem in

(2.7) works as follows. For j = 1, 2, . . . , k,


               reject H0j,δ (i.e., select alternative j),   if   X̄j (n) − max X̄i (n) ≥ z,
                                                                           i6=j



and accept H0j,δ otherwise. Here the constant z and the common sample size n of all alternatives

need to be carefully chosen.

    Only a single alternative is expected to be returned as the best. Straightforwardly, it occurs

                                                    12
if only one H0j,δ is rejected. This suffices to require that the rejection regions for H0j,δ (j =

1, 2, . . . , k) compose the disjoint partition of the whole space Rk+ . One way to achieve this goal

is setting z = 0. In doing so, the alternative with the largest sample mean is selected as the

best. Besides, the common sample size n is chosen such that the Type II error probability for

each HTjδ satisfies (2.3), and specifically,


         P Type II error in HTjδ
          
                                             
                                          j,δ
       = P X̄j (n) − max X̄i (n) < 0 H1
                      i6=j
                √                                                     r                       
                   n[X̄i (n) − X̄j (n) − (µi − µj )]                      n                j,δ
       = P max                  √                    > − max(µi − µj )        , ∀i 6 = j H1
            i6=j                  2σ 2                   i6=j            2σ 2
                        r      
                            n
       ≤ P max Zi > δ             ≤ α,                                                           (3.12)
            i6=j           2σ 2

where (Zi , i 6= j) is a (k − 1)-dimensional multivariate Gaussian random variable with means

0, variances 1 and common pairwise correlations 1/2. Let h denote the (1 − α) quantile of the

maximum of Zi (i 6= j). The common sample size n is chosen as

                                              2h2 σ 2
                                                     
                                           n=           ,                                       (3.13)
                                                δ2

where dxe denotes the smallest number no smaller than x.

   Following the testing procedure above, a R&S procedure can be constructed. It first de-

termines the common sample size allocated to each alternative as (3.13). Then it selects the

alternative with the largest sample mean as the best. This is exactly Bechhofer’s procedure.

   Regarding Bechhofer’s procedure, we make two remarks here.


  (i) From (3.12), we see that the worst-case of Type II error probabilities is attained when the

      best mean is exactly δ better than all the others, i.e., µ[k] − δ = µ[k−1] = · · · = µ[1] . Thus,

      this configuration of means is the most difficult situation in Θδ and Bechhofer (1954)

      names it the least favorable configuration (LFC) of means.

 (ii) Bechhofer’s procedure is also able to deliver the PGS guarantee in (2.8). To verify this

      statement, we only need to prove that the Type II error constraint in (2.3) can be achieved

      while applying the procedure to address the HTjG for all j. This proof is easily accom-

      plished and therefore omitted in this study.



                                                    13
      Rinott (1978) extends Bechhofer’s procedures to the situation where the variances across

alternatives are unknown and unequal. To handle this situation, Bechhofer’s procedure is

modified in three aspects. First, an initial stage is included in which a small number of samples

are generated to estimate the unknown variances. Second, the total sample sizes allocated to

each alternative are not the same any more but are set to be positively proportional to its sample

variance. Third, the constant hR in the total sample size Ni needs to be modified accordingly.

Finding this constant needs to solve a root-find problem with integration, i.e.,

                              Z ∞
                                     Ψk−1
                                      n0 −1 (t + hR )ψn0 −1 (t)dt = (1 − α),
                                −∞


where Ψn0 −1 and ψn0 −1 denote the cumulative distribution function and probability density

function of a standard student-t distribution with n0 − 1 degrees of freedom, respectively. His-

torically, due to the limited computational capacity, it is considered difficult to solve; hence,

tables are provided (Wilcox, 1984; Bechhofer et al., 1995; Goldsman et al., 1998). The new

two-stage procedure (named as the Rinott’s procedure) is presented as follows.

Procedure 1 Rinott’s Procedure
Require: Number of alternatives k, common first-stage sample size n0 ≥ 2, PCS 1 − α, IZ
parameter δ, a constant hR .
 1: Generate n0 samples for each alternative i and calculate the sample variance Si2 (n0 ).
 2: for i ← 1 : n do
 3:      Let
                                                      2 2        
                                                       hR Si (n0 )
                                        Ni ← max n0 ,                 .                     (3.14)
                                                           δ2

 4:      Generate Ni − n0 samples from alternative i and calculate the sample mean X̄i (Ni ).
 5: end for
 6: Select arg maxi=1,2,...,k X̄i (Ni ) as the best.



      As the simplest and most popular IZ procedure, there are a lot of variations of Rinott’s

procedure. For instance, to avoid the complexity in calculating hR , some procedures (Clark

and Yang, 1986) adopt Bonferroni’s inequality and set it approximately as the 1 − α/(k − 1)

quantile of a t-distribution with n0 − 1 degrees of freedom (Banerjee, 1961). As a price, it

often leads to more conservativeness, which means that a larger sample size is needed for the

procedure. Another variation of Rinott’s procedure worth mentioning is the use of common

random numbers (CRNs) (Clark and Yang, 1986; Nelson and Matejcik, 1995). CRNs artificially

introduce a positive correlation between the observations from each pair of alternatives, thus


                                                       14
decreasing the variance of their sample mean difference. In doing so, the R&S process becomes

much easier and the sample size required is ultimately reduced.


3.2    Sequential R&S procedures

Paulson’s procedure is one of the early sequential R&S procedures, and this subsection will

start from re-deriving this procedure from the hypothesis-testing perspective. Same as Bech-

hofer’s procedure, Paulson’s procedure also considers the special case with common and known

variances, i.e., σ12 = σ22 = · · · = σk2 = σ 2 .

    Similar to Section 3.1, we first consider each HTjδ individually and our task is to design a

sequential testing procedure for it. However, such sequential procedure is not trivial because it

involves multiple pairwise comparisons between alternatives. As a remedy, we break down HTjδ

into a group of HT problems, each of which considers a pairwise comparison between alternative

j and one of the other alternatives. Particularly, HTjδ is decomposed into


                (HTjiδ )     H0ji,δ : µj + δ ≤ µi     versus    H1ji,δ : µj − δ > µi , ∀i 6= j.         (3.15)


Meanwhile, to control the Type II error in HTjδ at most α as desired in (2.3), we adopt Bon-

ferroni’s inequality and require


                            P Type II error in HTjiδ ≤ α/(k − 1), ∀ i 6= j.
                             
                                                                                                        (3.16)


A sequential procedure for HTjiδ is noticeably easy to obtain while satisfying (3.16), and a vast

volume of literature supports it. Specifically, we may use Wald’s sequential probability ratio

test (SPRT) (Wald, 1945, 2004) which,


                            rejects H0ji,δ ,   if n(X̄j (n) − X̄i (n)) ≥ a − λn,

                           accepts H0ji,δ , if n(X̄j (n) − X̄i (n)) ≤ −a + λn,


                                                                                                  k−1
                                                                                                         σ2
and continues to take samples otherwise. Here 0 < λ < δ and a is chosen as a = ln                  α     δ−λ .

    Now the original R&S problem is reformulated as k(k − 1) simultaneous HT problems, i.e.,

HTjiδ , for j 6= i. Each HTjiδ considers that the pairwise comparison between alternatives j and

i and is resolved by a sequential procedure as mentioned above. Intuitively, at any time of the



                                                      15
sampling process, we should select alternative j as the best if all the H0ji,δ (i 6= j) are rejected.

We eliminate alternative j from consideration if one of the H0ji,δ (i 6= j) is accepted. Otherwise

we continue to take samples otherwise. Once an alternative is eliminated, we should stop taking

samples from this alternative and abandon all the HTjiδ regarding it. For clarity, I(n) denotes

the set of surviving alternative right before stage n, then a sequential procedure is designed as


           selecting alternative j,       if n(X̄j (n) − X̄i (n)) ≥ a − λn, ∀ i ∈ I(n) and i 6= j,

        eliminating alternative j , if n(X̄j (n) − X̄i (n)) ≤ −a + λn, ∃ i ∈ I(n) and i 6= j.


It continues to take samples on the surviving alternatives otherwise. This sequential procedure

is known as Paulson’s procedure.

      Kim and Nelson (2001) extend Paulson’s procedure to the case of unknown and unequal

variances. Similar to the previous two-stage procedures, Kim and Nelson’s (KN ) procedure

also uses an additional initial stage of sampling to estimate the unknown variances. After the

variances are estimated, it then starts screening alternatives just as Paulson’s procedure does.

In addition, replacing Paulson’s bound by a tighter bound of Fabian (1974) and considering the

estimated variances which are random variables, KN procedure re-assigns the values of λ and

a to ensure the same PCS guarantee. The detailed KN procedure is presented in Procedure 2.

Procedure 2 KN Procedure
Require: Number of alternatives k, common first-stage sample size n0 ≥ 2, PCS 1 − α, IZ
parameter δ, a constant h.
 1: Set                              "                 #
                                                                  −2/(n0 −1)
                                                  1       2α
                                             η=                                 −1 .
                                                  2      k−1

 2: I ← {1, 2, . . . , k}, h2 = 2η(n0 − 1), n ← n0 .
 3: Generate n0 samples to each alternative j and calculate X̄i (n0 ). For i, j ∈ I,
                                                  n0
                               2         1 X                                    2
                              Sji =           Xjl − Xil − (X̄j (n0 ) − X̄i (n0 )) .
                                      n0 − 1
                                                  l=1


 4: while |I| > 1 do
                        n       h2 S 2           o
                           δ            ji
 5:      Set Wji = max 0, 2n       δ2
                                             −n         and
                           
                        I ← j : j ∈ I and X̄j (n) − X̄i (n) ≥ −Wji (n), ∀i ∈ I, i 6= j

 6:      Take an additional observation from each alternative j ∈ I, and set n ← n + 1.
 7: end while
 8: Select the alternative in I as the best.



      An intuitive way to understand KN procedure is presented in Figure 1. For each pair of


                                                              16
alternatives j and i, it constructs the partial-sum process of their mean difference {n(X̄j (n) −

X̄i (n)) : n = 1, 2, . . . }. Then, at each stage n, KN checks whether this partial-sum process

exits from the triangular region and makes decisions accordingly .

                        2


                       1.5


                        1


                       0.5


                        0


                      -0.5


                       -1


                      -1.5
                             0   0.5   1   1.5   2    2.5   3   3.5   4   4.5   5




                      Figure 1: Triangular Region for the KN procedures.


   The KN procedure has numerous variations, and this family of procedures is shown to

be effective among IZ procedures (Kim and Nelson, 2006b; Branke et al., 2007). All these

variations are classified into two categories. The first category intends to enhance the efficiency

of the KN procedure. For instance, Hong (2006) designed a variance-dependent sampling rule.

Moreover, Tsai and Nelson (2009) and Tsai et al. (2017) adopted the control-variates technique.

In another study, Nelson et al. (2001) took advantage of the first-stage samples to screen out

alternatives that are unlikely to be the best. The second category intends to address different

practical situations. For instance, Hong and Nelson (2005) considered the cost of switching

between alternatives to take samples and designed a new procedure to balance the tradeoff

between sampling and switching costs. In a follow-up study, Hong and Nelson (2007b) noticed

a situation where alternatives may be revealed sequentially, thus designing a new procedure for

this situation. Meanwhile, Kim and Nelson (2006a) studied the steady-state experiments and

designed a new procedure achieving the PCS guarantee asymptotically.


3.3   Indifference-zone-free R&S procedures

In the previous Sections 3.1 and 3.2, we have seen how the IZ formulation (i.e., µ ∈ Θδ = {µ :

µ[k] − δ > µ[k−1] }) helps to achieve the PCS guarantee. However, problem remains whether a

R&S procedure with the PCS guarantee can be developed for all possible mean vectors in Θ.

                                                     17
      To solve this problem, Fan et al. (2016) proposed an IZ-free procedure. We call it FHN

procedure and present it as Procedure 3. Similar to KN procedure, it decomposes a R&S prob-

lem into a group of pairwise comparisons and designs a procedure for each pairwise comparison.

When µ ∈ Θ, the pairwise mean differences might be arbitrarily close to zero. Then, the desired

procedure is intended to detect whether these mean differences are zero or not. Motivated by

the law of iterated logarithm, this IZ-free procedure adopts a new continuation region whose
                                                         √
boundary function grows to infinity at a rate between O( n log log n) and O(n). For instance,
                      p
a boundary function [c + log(n + 1)](n + 1) is used as shown in Procedure 3.

Procedure 3 FHN Procedure
Require: Number of alternatives k, common first-stage sample size n0 ≥ 2, PCS 1 − α.
 1: Set                                             
                                                                2α
                                                  c = −2 log           .
                                                               k−1
 2: I ← {1, 2, . . . , k}, n ← n0 .
 3: Generate n0 samples to each alternative j and calculate X̄j (n0 ). For i, j ∈ I,
                                                  n0
                              2               1 X                                      2
                             Sji (n0 ) =             Xjl − Xil − (X̄j (n0 ) − X̄i (n0 )) .
                                           n0 − 1
                                                  l=1


 4: while |I| > 1 do
                          2 (n) and g (t (n)) =
                                                         p
 5:      Set tji (n) = n/Sji         ji ji                [c + log(tji (n) + 1)](tji (n) + 1), and let

                   I ← {j : j ∈ I and tji (n)[X̄j (n) − X̄i (n)] ≥ −gji (tji (n)), ∀i ∈ I, i 6= j},

 6:    Take an additional observation from each alternative j ∈ I, and set n ← n + 1.
 7: end while
 8: Select the alternative in I as the best.


      Now we illustrate from the HT perspective why this IZ-free procedure is able to achieve the

PCS guarantee in (2.1). As mentioned in Section 2.1.2, the challenge for the conventional IZ

procedures is how to control the Type I and Type II errors in each HTj simultaneously when

the second-best mean is arbitrarily close to the best. Specifically, (2.5) shows that we might

lose such control at the point µ 0 with µ0j = maxi6=j µ0i , which is caused by the continuity of the

power function. The FHN procedure resolves this challenge by forcing its power function βj (·)

to be discontinuous at µ 0 .

      The FHN procedure addresses the HTj (j = 1, 2, . . . , k) by


             rejecting H0j , if tji (n)[X̄j (n) − X̄i (n)] ≥ g(tji (n)), ∀i ∈ I(n) and i 6= j,

            accepting H0j , if tji (n)[X̄j (n) − X̄i (n)] ≤ −g(tji (n)), ∃ i ∈ I(n) and i 6= j,



                                                         18
and continues sampling otherwise. Here I(n) denotes the set of surviving alternatives right

before stage n. Then, a careful derivation yields that


       βj (µ ) ≥ 1 − α, for µ with µj > max µi , and βj (µ ) ≤ α, for µ with µj ≤ max µi ,
                                        i6=j                                       i6=j



                                                         µ). The inequalities above also show
thereby demonstrating a discontinuous power function βj (µ

that FHN procedure satisfies the constraints of error probability in (2.3) and (2.4), implying

the desired PCS guarantee in (2.1) can be achieved.

    Fan et al. (2016) also extended FHN procedure to incorporate an IZ parameter when it is

available. Particularly, a stopping condition, based on the IZ parameter, is embedded into the

original FHN procedure. The new procedure is shown to be able to achieve not only the PCS

guarantee as in (2.1), but also the PGS guarantee in (2.8).



4     Fixed-budget procedures

In this section, we review the existing fixed-budget R&S procedures related to the DP formula-

tion. With a fixed sampling budget, the main task of R&S procedures is to determine a sample

allocation policy, which is formulated as a DP problem in (2.10) as introduced in Section 2.2.

This DP problem is essentially a finite-horizon stochastic DP, and can be solved exactly by

backward induction through Bellman equation (2.11). However, this exact procedure is often

impossible to execute due to the curse of dimensionality. This motivates the researchers to con-

sider the suboptimal solutions generated by easily implementable approximation procedures. In

particular, all the procedures reviewed in this section can be regarded as approximate dynamic

programming (ADP) procedures.


4.1   Static-allocation based procedures

As a practically acceptable DP procedure is impossible to obtain, one possible approach would be

developing a good heuristic procedure instead. Intuitively, a superior DP procedure “optimizes”

the way of collecting information about the mean of each alternative. Hypothetically, if we have

perfect information at the beginning but still have to make selection based on the samples, a

simple static allocation policy that maximizes the precision of the selection will be proper.

For example, assuming the precision of selection is measured by the PCS guarantee in (2.1),


                                               19
the optimal allocation policy can be determined by solving the following static optimization

problem,
                                                                                    
                                    max           P X̄[k] (n[k] ) > max X̄[j] (n[j] ) ,                                   (4.17)
                              n[1] +···+n[k] =N                         [j]6=[k]


where n[i] denotes the sample size allocated to alternative [i], for i = 1, 2, . . . , k.

   Based on the static allocation policy, several procedures have been developed. The optimal

computing budget allocation (OCBA) procedure, initiated by Chen (1996) and Chen et al.

(2000), is among the most famous static-allocation based procedures. Moreover, the OCBA

procedure has also been extended to sequential settings, and the basic idea is to dynamically

approximate the static allocation policy based on the sample information.

   Taking the sequential algorithm of OCBA proposed by Chen et al. (2000) as an example, a

total budget of N is allocated to T stages sequentially with each stage endowed with τ = N/T .

Perfect information is assumed in developing the OCBA procedure at first. Particularly, it

assumes the information given at stage t as Et = {(µj , σj2 ), j = 1, · · · k} for 0 ≤ t ≤ T . For any

intermediate stage t, the allocation policy is determined by a static allocation problem as (4.17),

in which the budget for the first t stages are reallocated for a myopic objective of maximizing

PCS as if the selection is made at the end of the current stage.

                                                                                                    
                  VtOCBA (Et ) =            max               P X̄[k] (n[k],t ) > max X̄[j] (n[j],t ) .
                                    n[1],t +···+n[k],t =τ t                        [j]6=[k]


Here n[i],t is the total sample size that is allocated to alternative [i] up to the end of stage t,

for i = 1, 2, . . . , k and t = 1, 2, . . . , T . The allocation rule is then derived by approximating

the PCS with Bonferroni’s inequality and letting the budget per stage goes to infinity. The

resulting allocation rule is presented in Step 5 in Procedure 4.

   Moreover, using the large deviation theory, Glynn and Juneja (2004) derived the asymptotic

optimal allocation policy for (4.17) that maximizes the exponential decay rate of the probability

of incorrect selection as N → ∞. Specially, they showed that the optimal allocation satisfies
                                                                                        v
                                                                                                                 !2
     n∗[i]                                                                                               n∗[j]
                                                                                        u
               2 /(µ              2
             σ[i]    [k] − µ[i] )
                                                                                        u X
           ≈                        ,   for [i] 6= [j] 6= [k],         and n∗[k] = σ[k] t                             .   (4.18)
                                                                                        u
     n∗[j]    2 /(µ
             σ[j]    [k] − µ[j] )
                                  2                                                                      σ[j]
                                                                                              [j]6=[k]



This equation provides a theoretical benchmark on the optimality of static allocation policy.

Careful investigation reveals that the optimal allocation coincides with the one in the OCBA


                                                               20
procedure. Thus, the OCBA policy is asymptotically efficient.

Procedure 4 OCBA Procedure
Require: Number of alternatives k, common first-stage sample size n0 ≥ 5, total sampling
budget N , sampling budget τ per stage.
 1: Generate n0 samples from each alternative i.
                                        Pk
 2: Set t ← 0, ni,t ← n0 , bt ←               i=1 ni,t .
 3: while bt < N do
 4:      Update the sample mean x̄i 1 and the sample variance σ̂i2 ; (k) ← arg maxi x̄i and d(i)(k) ←
    x̄(k) − x̄i .
 5: P Set bt+1 ← bt +τ . Calculate the new budget allocation n1,t+1 , n2,t+1 , . . . , nk,t+1 satisfying
       i ni,t+1 = bt+1 according to
                                             2
                ni,t+1         σ̂i /d(i)(k)
                                                                                               sX
                       =                           , for i 6= j 6= (k), and n(k),t+1 = σ̂(k)            n2i,t+1 /σ̂i2 .
                nj,t+1         σ̂j /d(j)(k)
                                                                                               i6=(k)


 6:     Generate max{0, ni,t+1 − ni,t } samples from each alternative i. Set t ← t + 1.
 7: end while
 8: Select arg max x̄i as the best.



      In practice we do not have perfect information about the means and variances of the al-

ternatives, and the OCBA procedure suggests to use sample estimates instead, based on the

available data at the beginning of each stage (see Step 4).

      Some variations of the above OCBA procedure have been proposed. He et al. (2007) adopted

the linear loss function to measure the quality of the selection and designed an OCBA-type

procedure; Gao et al. (2017) also consider the case of linear loss function but design an OCBA-

type procedure based on the large-deviation theory. Branke et al. (2007) addressed the issue of

unknown variances and proposed to use a student-t approximation; Peng et al. (2018) directly

approximate the objective function in (4.17) using some feature functions. Moreover, Fu et al.

(2007) considered the case of correlated samples across alternatives and showed that the optimal

policy agrees with that of the independent case as the correlation vanishes.


4.2     Two-stage approximation based procedures

Static-allocation-based procedures like OCBA are developed by assuming that the means and

variances are known. In addition, these procedures use the corresponding sample estimators

to replace the unknown parameters in practical implementations. In contrast, another stream

of research takes account of the unknown means and variances in developing the procedures.
   1
     Most of DP procedures are described as Bayesian procedures. Therefore, they are used to represent random
variable with upper-case letters and represent their observations with lower-case letters. To keep in line with the
existing literature, we use x̄ in Section 4 to denote the observation of sample mean.


                                                               21
These procedures often contain two stages, which include a first-stage sampling to collect some

information about the unknown parameters and then use the information to guide the second-

stage allocation decision.

      As a representative, we shall review one famous two-stage procedure proposed by Chick and

Inoue (2001), known as the expected value of information (EVI) procedure. In particular, we

consider the one with linear loss and a budget constraint, or namely Procedure LL(B). The

procedure adopts Bayesian approach for updating the information collected about the mean

performance of any alternative i, which is assumed to be a random variable Wi . At the first

stage, it takes n0 samples from alternative i and computes the sample means and variances
           2 ). By Bayes’ rule, it indicates the prior distribution of W ∼ St(x̄ , n /σ̂ 2 , n − 1),
(x̄i,0 , σ̂i,0                                                          i       i,0 0   i,0 0

where St(µ, κ, ν) denotes the student-t distribution with mean µ, precision κ, and degrees of

freedom ν. If additional ni − n0 samples are allocated to alternative i and the overall sample

mean and variance are (x̄i , σ̂i2 ), then the posterior distribution Wi becomes St(x̄i , ni /σ̂i2 , ni − 1).

The final selection will go to the alternative with the largest sample mean, i.e., (k) = arg maxi x̄i .

A false selection will incur a linear loss which is maxi Wi − W(k) . Therefore, the problem for

the second stage is to choose (n1 , · · · , nk ) to minimize the expected linear loss2 , i.e.,

                                                                                
                           min           E E max Wi − W(k) (X1 , X2 , . . . , Xk ) ,                 (4.19)
                     n1 +n2 +···+nk =N           i



Notice that (n1 , n2 , . . . , nk ) are determined before the second stage. Therefore, to calculate the

expected linear loss, we need to take the expectation with respect to the second-stage samples

(X1 , X2 , . . . , Xk ) which are random. As the problem in (4.19) has no closed-form solution, Chick

and Inoue (2001) derived their allocation policy by asymptotically minimizing a bound of the

expected loss.

      Chick and Inoue (2001) then adapted this two-stage procedure to the dynamic setting. At

each intermediate stage t, a set of observations is collected from each alternative in the previous

stages, based on which the current-stage allocation policy needs to be determined. This issue

is essentially what the two-stage procedure above attempts to address. Therefore, it seems

natural to determine this allocation policy by applying the two-stage procedure. Particularly, a

myopic perspective is taken as if the selection is made at the end of stage t and the current-stage
  2
    In the original paper of Chick and Inoue (2001), they also consider the sampling cost, which results an
additional linear term in the objective function.




                                                     22
allocation policy is then obtained by solving (4.19),

                                                                                                  
         VtEVI (Et ) = P           min
                                   P                 E E max Wi − W(k) (X1,t , X2,t , . . . , Xk,t ) ,              (4.20)
                            i ni,t =   i ni,t−1 +τ
                                                                  i



where Xi,t denotes the random samples that will be taken at stage t. The extension from the

above two-stage procedure to a sequential procedure encounters an obstacle, which is caused

by the unbalanced samples from different alternatives. Technically, it involves the subtraction

of two student-t random variables with different degrees of freedom. Chick and Inoue (2001)

overcame this difficulty by using the Welch approximation.

Procedure 5 EVI Procedure for Linear Loss
Require: Number of alternatives k, common first-stage sample size n0 ≥ 2, total sampling
budget N , sampling budget τ per stage.
 1: Generate n0 samples from each alternative i.
                                           Pk
 2: Set t ← 0, ni,t ← n0 , bt ←               i=1 ni,t .
 3: while bt < N do
 4:      Update x̄i and σ̂i2 . Set x̄(1) ≤ x̄(2) ≤ · · · ≤ x̄(k) and L = {1, 2, . . . , k}.
 5:      Let λ−1         2               2
              (i)(j) ← σ̂(i) /n(i),t + σ̂(j) /n(j),t , d(i)(k) ← x̄(k) − x̄(i) . Set bt+1 ← bt + τ .
 6:      For each alternative (i) ∈ L, calculate
                                                                                            1/2
                                                                                      2
                                                                  P
                                                             τ+    (j)∈L n (j),t   σ̂ (i) η(i)
                                          n(i),t+1 =                                1/2
                                                                             2
                                                                  P
                                                                    (j)∈L σ̂(j) η(j)


      where

                 1/2
                          ni,t − 1 + λ(i)(k) d2(i)(k)           h
                                                                  1/2
                                                                                i                           X
         η(i) = λ(i)(k)                                 ψni,t −1 λ(i)(k) d(i)(k) for (i) 6= (k), and η(k) =   η(j) ,
                                   ni,t − 2
                                                                                                         (j)6=(k)


      and ψs (·) denotes the probability density function of a standard student-t distribution with s degrees
      of freedom.
 7:      while min(i)∈L (n(i),t+1 − n(i),t ) < 0 do
 8:        if n(i),t+1 − n(i),t < 0 then
 9:              Set L ← L \ (i) and n(i),t+1 ← n(i),t .
10:           end if
11:           For each alternative (i) ∈ L, update
                                                     ( 2                2
                                                      σ̂(i) /n(i),t + σ̂(k) /n(k),t ,    if (k) ∈ L
                                       λ−1
                                        (i)(k) =         2
                                                       σ̂(i) /n(i),t ,                  if (k) ∈
                                                                                               / L.

12:        Go back to Step 6.
13:    end while
14:    Generate ni,t+1 − ni,t samples from each alternative i ∈ L. Set t ← t + 1.
15: end while
16: Select arg max x̄i as the best.




                                                                      23
   The procedure is documented in Procedure 5, where we assume the sampling cost from each

alternative is the same and set as one. Notice that optimal sampling allocation policy in Step

4 looks very similar to that of the OCBA procedure (Step 5 in Procedure 3), because these two

procedures are derived in a similar way as mentioned before.

   In the same paper, Chick and Inoue (2001) also considered the problem with unconstrained

budget, and proposed an EVI procedure to determine the number of replications to balance

the replication costs against the reduction in expected opportunity cost. They also proposed

analogous procedures with the 0-1 loss function. Chick et al. (2010) developed a variation of

the EVI procedure in which the sampling budget is allocated to only one alternative at each

stage. For this special case, they showed that most of the approximations in solving this optimal

allocation policy can be avoided and therefore derived a procedure with better performance,

especially in the small-budget problems.


4.3    One-step-look-ahead procedures

In this section we review the group of DP procedures which are derived using the one-step

look-ahead approximation. Specifically, we consider the knowledge-gradient (KG) procedure

proposed by Frazier et al. (2008).

   The KG procedure also adopts a Bayesian approach to solve the R&S problem. Unlike

the EVI, it determines the optimal sampling allocation policy by maximizing the expected

terminal reward. Suppose that there is a budget of N samples for selecting the best from k

alternatives. Information collected from the samples is summarized in the posterior distribution

of the unknown mean for each alternative. Let µti and (σit )2 be the mean and variance of the

posterior distribution for alternative i after observing the first t samples. Then, the problem is

to determine the allocation of the (t + 1)-th sample z t+1 ∈ {1, · · · , k} for t = 0, · · · , N − 1, in

order to maximize the expected terminal reward E{maxi µN
                                                       i |EN }, and the alternative with the

largest µN
         i is selected as the best. Here the information set Et records the posterior mean and

variance after the tth sample, and is updated according to the Bayes rule.

   From the view of dynamic-programming formulation, we solve


                VtKG (Et ) =        max             E{VN (EN )|Et } =        max             E{max µN
                                                                                                    i |Et }.
                               (z t+1 ,··· ,z N )                       (z t+1 ,··· ,z N )       i




                                                             24
The key idea of KG procedure is to approximate Vt (Et ) by

                                    N −1
                                           max E{max µj+1 − max µji |Ej } + max µti ,
                                    X
                     VtKG (Et ) ≈                     i
                                           z j+1       i                  i                  i
                                    j=t


and the problem reduces to solve the one-step optimization problem


                                     max E{max µt+1
                                                i   − max µti |Et }.                                 (4.21)
                                      z t+1        i                  i



Intuitively, it maximizes the increment (e.g., gradient) in the “knowledge” gained from the next

sample, which explains the name “knowledge gradient”.

      We assume that the samples across different alternatives are independent and have a common

and known variance. In this special structure, the optimal solution of (4.21) has a closed form

(see Steps 4-5 in Procedure 5 or Theorem 1 in Frazier et al. (2008)). This structure is highly

attractive from the implementational point of view. Besides, the procedure possesses other

favorable properties. For instance, it is consistent, i.e., the selected alternative converges to the

true best as the total sampling budget N grows to the infinity, and the suboptimality of the

KG policy is bounded for any finite budget N .

Procedure 6 KG Procedure
Require: Number of alternatives k, total sampling budget N , common and known variance
σ 2 , prior predictive mean µi and variance σi2 for each alternative.
 1: Set t ← 0. Let µti ← µi , βit ← 1/σi2 and β = 1/σ 2 .
 2: while t < N do
 3:    Calculate the variance of the change in predictive mean by taking a sample from alter-
    native i, σ̃i2 = (βit )−1 − (βit + β)−1 .
 4:    Calculate
                                                           µti − maxj6=i µtj
                                               ζi = −                        .                       (4.22)
                                                                  σ̃i

 5:      Choose
                                    z t+1 = arg max              σ̃i (ζi Φ(ζi ) + φ(ζi )),
                                                   i=1,2,...,k

    where Φ(·) and φ(·) denote the cumulative distribution function and probability density
    function of the standard Gaussian distribution, respectively.
 6:    Take a sample yzt+1
                         t+1 from alternative z
                                                t+1 . Update


                       βzt+1     t
                          t+1 ← βz t+1 + β,         µt+1
                                                     z t+1
                                                           ← (βzt t+1 µtz t+1 + βyzt+1     t+1
                                                                                    t+1 )/βz t+1 .


 7:      Set t ← t + 1.
 8: end while
 9: Select arg max µti as the best.




                                                            25
    The original KG procedure of Frazier et al. (2008) has several variations. For instance,

Frazier et al. (2009) and Xie et al. (2016) extended the procedure to the case of correlated sam-

pling and correlated Gaussian beliefs on the mean vectors. Ryzhov (2016) adopted a different

way to define the value of information functions and then derived the corresponding optimal

sampling allocation rule. In this rule, the allocation ratios among the non-best alternatives

are quite similar to that of the OCBA procedures. However, the total proportion of samples

allocated to these non-best alternatives vanishes as the total sampling budget grows to infinity.

To understand the connection between Ryzhov’s procedure and the OCBA procedure, Peng and

Fu (2017) showed that the allocation rules of the OCBA procedure can be achieved by slightly

modifying the function used to describe the value of information in Ryzhov (2016).



5    Large-scale R&S procedures using parallel computing

As mentioned before, many existing R&S procedures, under either the fixed-precision or the

fixed-budget formulations, are designed to solve small- or medium-scale problems, with total

number of alternatives typically less than 500, which is largely due to the limited computing re-

source. On one hand, there are many large-scale R&S problems in practice that have thousands

to millions of alternatives, which are traditionally solved by optimization-via-simulation (OvS)

algorithms (see, for instance, Hong and Nelson (2009) and Hong et al. (2015) for comprehensive

reviews of OvS). On the other hand, the fast development of computer technology and parallel

computing (e.g., either from the multi-core personal computers to many-core servers or from

smart phones to cloud services) are prevalent and ready for ordinary users to access. Then,

using parallel computing to solve a large-scale R&S problem directly becomes an interesting

research topic. It has even been labeled as one of the three central developments in the past 15

years by Fu and Henderson (2017).

    Researchers begin investigating parallel computing for R&S problems by asking the following

questions: (i) Can existing R&S procedures can be easily implemented in a parallel fashion; (ii)

If not, how are these procedures modified to suit for parallel computing environments? (iii)

In the process of parallelization, what kind of substantial issues need to be addressed? To the

best of our knowledge, Yücesan et al. (2001) and Chen (2005) are the two earliest works in the

literature that try to answer the first question. In particular, the former implemented the OCBA

procedure in a web-based parallel environment, and the latter executed a multi-stage procedure


                                               26
by distributing the simulation tasks to multiple processors. However, both studies tested their

procedures only for a small-scale problem with 10 alternatives, so it is not clear whether their

procedures are suitable for handling large-scale problems. Luo et al. (2015) (and their conference

paper Luo and Hong (2011)) and Ni et al. (2017) (and their conference papers Ni et al. (2013,

2014, 2015)) are works that intend to answer the three questions. They demonstrated that

redesigned procedures can be used to solve large-scale problems with thousands to millions of

alternatives in different parallel computing environments.

   There are various parallel computing environments that are suitable for R&S problems, and

they can be in general classified into three categories, i.e., Message-Passing Interface (MPI),

Hadoop MapReduce and Apache Spark (Ni et al. (2017)). The MPI (Gropp et al., 1999)

is a standardized and portable message-passing protocol for parallel programming on several

parallel computing architectures, which is equipped with C/C++ and Fortran libraries. Hadoop

(Dean and Ghemawat, 2008) is an open-source framework designed for distributed storage

and processing of large amounts of data and computation using the MapReduce programming

architecture. Apache Spark (Zaharia et al., 2010) is also an open-source framework for general-

purpose parallel computing. Both MapReduce and Spark are supported by several commercial

clouds including Amazon EC2, Google Cloud Platform and Microsoft Azure (Zhong and Hong

(2020)). Note that all the three frameworks can be implemented using the Master/Worker

parallel structure. MPI allows more flexibility of parallel implementation but does not detect

or manage core failures automatically compared with MapReduce and Spark.

   In the following, we first briefly describe both the theoretical and implementational chal-

lenges as modifying existing R&S procedures to suit for parallel computing environments in

Section 5.1. Then, we introduce some different performance measures and new frameworks that

are developed for large-scale R&S problems in Section 5.2. Two representative procedures are

also presented in Sections 5.1 and 5.2, respectively.


5.1   Extending existing procedures to parallel

In traditional R&S problems, the efficiency of a procedure can often be measured by the to-

tal running time, which is approximately the total simulation time of generating observations

from different alternatives. This method is reasonable since the operations of all other calcula-

tions and comparisons are quite fast and the total time of these operations could be negligible



                                               27
compared with the total simulation time as solving small-scale problems in a single-processor en-

vironment. However, when handling large-scale problems in a parallel computing environment,

the situation becomes complicated since the comparison operations may become the bottle-

neck. The communications and synchronizations among different processors may also need to

be taken into consideration. In other words, to measure the efficiency of a procedure in parallel

computing environments, we shall evaluate the running time from four aspects, i.e., the simula-

tion time, the comparison time, the communication time (i.e., the time to transfer information

between different processors) and the synchronization time (i.e., the time to wait for the ready

state of all processors). For the sake of presentation, we take the stage-wise and fully sequential

procedures in the fixed-precision formulation to illustrate the tradeoff among the four aspects.

   Stage-wise procedures are easy to parallelize and there are no communications among pro-

cessors until the comparison operation at the end of each stage, which means they are efficient

in comparison and communication. The synchronization is also not an issue if the simula-

tion tasks are distributed evenly onto different processors. Compared with fully sequential

procedures, however, stage-wise procedures are typically not efficient in total sample size, i.e.,

inefficient in simulation. For fully sequential procedures, they conduct all-pairwise comparisons

(i.e., k(k − 1)/2 in the worst-case) among all alternatives still in contention at each round when

all alternatives add one observation, implying frequent communications and synchronizations

among different processors. Therefore, they are inefficient in comparison, communication and

synchronization.

   Note that the total sample size is inherently determined by the theoretical framework of

a procedure, which could be hardly reduced even using parallel computing. Therefore, there

is little room for improving the efficiency of stage-wise procedures, and many works in the

literature focus on improving the efficiency of fully sequential procedures by redesigning them

to be fit for parallel computing in order to reduce the times for comparison, communication and

synchronization. For instance, Luo et al. (2015) address the synchronization issue by proposing

an asynchronization scheme to achieve a high simulation efficiency of sampling, and point out

the potential issues caused by all-pairwise comparisons and frequent communications. Later,

Ni et al. (2017) and Zhong et al. (2020) addressed the comparison issue using two different

approaches, namely, a “divide-and-conquer” scheme by distributing the all-pairwise comparisons

and a new comparison scheme by defining the “best” alternative differently. They further

mitigated the communication burden by using batching techniques and boosting the sample

                                                28
size of all surviving alternatives to a maximum number afterwards. Notably, different batching

techniques and boosting methods are proposed in Ni et al. (2017) and Zhong et al. (2020),

thus resulting in different theoretical foundations of their procedures. Before introducing more

details, we first briefly describe the aforementioned Master/Worker parallel structure which has

been used in Luo et al. (2015), Ni et al. (2017) and Zhong et al. (2020).

      Suppose that there are m + 1 processors in the parallel computing environment, in which

one processor serves as the master and the rest m processors serve as the workers, denoted

by workers 1, 2, . . . , m. The master is the controller who determines the start and stop of the

program, creates m job tasks for the workers, manages the data information and performs all

other necessary calculations. Workers 1, 2, . . . , m function in a simple way: Taking the task

from the master, processing the task, submitting the result to the master and requesting the

next task. The communications occur only between the master and workers, and there is no

communication among workers.

      To address the synchronization issue, Luo et al. (2015) defined each job task as generating one

observation from one alternative that is still in contention, and all alternatives in contention are

queued in a round-robin order in front of the master. This one-by-one task assignment scheme

requires no synchronization among workers, and can indeed fairly balance the workloads of

different workers. However, given the random processing time of each task on different workers,

the sequence of the simulation results sent back to the master is also random, which is likely to

be different from the round-robin assigning order. Therefore, it may cause unexpected statistical

issues as implementing existing fully sequential procedures based on the output sequence. One

straightforward way is to restore all the outputs exactly in the same order as in the original

input sequence, and perform comparisons according to the input sequence, which is the basic

idea for the vector-filling KN (VKN) procedure of Luo et al. (2015). We omit the details about

the VKN procedure, but summarize two disadvantages of VKN. First, it needs to create a vector

to store these outputs, which may require a large amount of memory. Second, it does not allow

the failure of any worker or the communication interruption, as the vector may be incomplete

if some of the simulation results are lost in these situations.

      To resolve these problems, Luo et al. (2015) proposed the asymptotic parallel selection (APS)

procedure, which performs all-pairwise comparisons directly based on the output sequence and

introduces a phantom alternative to determine the time points for comparisons.3 However,
  3
      Note that the phantom alternative does not need to be processed by any worker but immediately returns to


                                                      29
the desired finite-time PCS guarantee is no longer achieved, as the sample sizes of different

alternatives in the output sequence are random and perhaps unequal; these observations from

the same alternatives are not even i.i.d. Fortunately, the innovative idea of introducing the

phantom alternative, which serves as a drumbeat process with predetermined time points, allows

to establish a finite lag of the difference between the input and output sequences that finally

vanishes in an asymptotic regime. By doing so, the APS procedure of Luo et al. (2015) provides

an asymptotic PCS guarantee. We present the APS procedure in Procedure 7.

Procedure 7 Asymptotic Parallel Selection (APS) Procedure
Require: Number of alternatives k, PCS 1 − α ∈ (1/k, 1), IZ parameter δ > 0, the first-stage
sample size n0 ≥ 2, and the number of processors m + 1 (i.e., one master and m workers).
 1: Let a = − log [2α/(k − 1)] and I ← {1, 2, . . . , k}.
 2: Let p denote the phantom alternative queued after each round-robin cycle and let the stage
    r denote the current sample size of p. P
                                         Nir , N
                                                           PNir 2 
 3: For all i ∈ I, record the triple              ir
                                                `=1 Yi` ,    `=1 Yi` , where Yi` is the `th completed
    observation from alternative i and Nir P   is the total samplePNirsize2 obtained from alternative i
    at stage r. Set r ← 1 and set Nir ← 0, N      `=1
                                                     ir
                                                        Yi` ←  0,   `=1 Yi` ← 0 for all i ∈ I.
 4: Using the round-robin order to start simulations on workers 1, 2, . . . , m.
 5: while |I| > 1 do
 6:     Wait for the next observation Yh· .
 7:     if h ∈ I then             PNhr               PNhr 2         PNhr 2
            Update N                                                              2
                    P hr
 8:                    `=1 Yh` ←     `=1 Yh` +Yh· ,     `=1 Yh` ←     `=1 Yh` +Yh· and Nhr ← Nhr +1.
 9:     else if h ∈
                  / I and h 6= p then
10:         Drop the observation.
11:     else if h = p then
12:         for all i, j ∈ I and i 6= j do
13:            if Nir ≥ n0 and Njr ≥ n0 then
14:                Let
                                                                               −1
                                                     Si2 (Nir )   Sj2 (Njr )
                                                 
                                       τij,r =                  +                    ,
                                                        Nir          Njr

      where Si2 (Nir ) and Sj2 (Njr ) are the sample variance of alternatives i and j, respectively.
15:             else
16:                 Let τij,r = 0.
17:             end if
18:        end for
19:        Set
                                                                                                   
                                                                           a δ
              I←       i : i ∈ I and τij,r Ȳi (Nir ) − Ȳj (Njr ) ≥ min 0, − + τij,r , ∀j ∈ I, j 6= i ,
                                                                             δ 2

     where Ȳi (Nir ) and Ȳj (Njr ) are the sample mean of alternatives i and j, respectively.
20:        Set r ← r + 1.
21:     end if
22: end while
23: Select the alternative in I as the best.

the master for requiring the master to perform eliminations by conducting all-pairwise comparisons.




                                                            30
   As mentioned but not addressed by Luo et al. (2015), all-pairwise comparisons conducted

in the master could overwhelm the workload of the master and the frequent communications

between the master and workers could become the bottleneck for solving large-scale R&S prob-

lems. In order to reduce the comparisons, the good selection procedure (GSP) of Ni et al.

(2017) proposes a “divide-and-conquer” approach to distributing all-pairwise comparisons onto

the workers. The master initially divides k alternatives into m groups and asks each worker to

conduct local all-pairwise comparisons for eliminations within the assigned group. Then, the

computational complexity of comparisons at each round is reduced from O(k 2 ) to O(k 2 /m2 ).

To further improve the elimination efficiency, at the beginning of each local comparison round,

the master retrieves the m local bests from the m groups to find the global best and then sends

the global best to the m groups for additional comparisons.

   To reduce the frequent communications, GSP introduces a batching technique of samples.

In particular, it suggests each worker to simulate a batch of 100 or 200 samples from one

alternative once at a time. In addition, when a surviving alternative takes enough samples, i.e.,

reaching a threshold, the procedure requires all surviving alternatives take a maximum number

of samples. It selects the one with the largest sample mean as the best. By doing so, GSP

can significantly reduce the communication frequency. In fact, the maximum sample size in

the boosting stage (i.e., Stage 3 in their procedure) is constructed based on the Rinott’s result

and the sequential elimination rule in Stage 2 is built on the results of Hong (2006). Taking

advantage of both sequential and stage-wise frameworks, GSP is an excellent hybrid procedure

that not only improves the comparison and communication efficiency, but also provides a finite-

time PGS guarantee of (2.8).

   One potential drawback of GSP is its conservativeness in terms of total sample size due to the

batching technique of samples and the error separation in the hybrid structure. In other words,

GSP sacrifices a certain level of sampling efficiency to achieve lower computational complexi-

ties of comparisons and communications as well as the finite-time statistical guarantee. This

drawback motivated Zhong et al. (2020) to design the parallel Paulson’s procedure (PPP) that

takes a different approach to achieving simulation, comparison and communication efficiency.

   In terms of the simulation efficiency, PPP adopts the well-known sequential procedure of

Paulson (1964), which often requires a smaller sample size than the stage-wise and the hybrid

procedures in the same desired guarantee level. In terms of the comparison efficiency, PPP



                                               31
breaks all-pairwise comparisons into comparisons with the “best”, which reduces the computa-

tional complexity of comparisons from O(k 2 ) to O(k) at each comparison round. The “best”

involves both the sample mean and sample variance information, which is different from the

global best involving only the mean information defined in GSP. In terms of the communication

efficiency, PPP uses a different batching technique, i.e., batching alternatives instead of sam-

ples, that can reduce the communication frequency without increasing the sample size. PPP

also allows to boost the sample size to a maximum number in Paulson’s sequential framework.

In addition, by incorporating the result of Kao and Lai (1980), PPP can also achieve the PGS

guarantee.

   We omit the presentation of both GSP and PPP. Interested readers may refer to the works

of the abovementioned authors for more details. The CRNs technique is difficult to implement

for VKN, APS, and GSP because of the asynchronized simulation scheme in Luo et al. (2015)

and Ni et al. (2017). Moreover, CRNs are not suitable for PPP because of the newly designed

comparison scheme in Zhong et al. (2020).


5.2   New parallel framework with sample-size optimality

The aforementioned procedures for parallel computing environments are all built on the paradigm

of existing stage-wise or fully sequential R&S procedures. They have even successfully solved

R&S problems with up to millions of alternatives. Therefore, we must ask whether they are

fundamentally suitable for handling large-scale problems. More precisely, we would like to know

how the expected total sample size E[N ] increases as the number of alternatives k increases.

   To answer the question, Zhong and Hong (2020) first proved that the growth rate of E[N ] for

any procedure with the PCS guarantee is lower bounded by O(k), and then defined the sample-

size optimality of a procedure if the upper bound of the growth rate of E[N ] can achieve the

lower bound rate, that is E[N ] = O(k). Intuitively speaking, the lower bound of E[N ] is easy

to understand since each alternative requires at least one observation to estimate the unknown

mean, resulting in a total sample size growing at least linearly in k. The lower bound is universal

for all stage-wise and fully sequential procedures in either the IZ or IZ-free framework (Zhong

and Hong, 2020).

   However, the upper bound is typically higher than the order of k for all existing stage-wise

and fully sequential procedures. For instance, the expected total sample size of each alternative


                                                32
in Paulson’s procedure grows proportionally to the ending point of the continuation region,

which grows in the order of log k, leading to O(k log k) in total sample size. This is because it

needs to compare the best with all other k − 1 alternatives in pairs in theoretical formulation,

which is also true for other fully sequential procedures such as KN procedure. Similarly, in

stage-wise procedures, e.g., one-stage procedure of Bechhofer (1954) and two-stage procedure

of Rinott (1978), they also need to compare the best with all other k − 1 alternatives in a joint

formulation as in (3.12), so the sample size of each alternative in (3.13) grows as k increases,

which inevitably leads to a higher order of k in total sample size. In other words, neither fully

sequential nor stage-wise procedures can achieve the sample-size optimality due to the nature

of comparisons between the best alternative and all others.

   Inspired by the knockout tournament arrangement of tennis Grand Slam tournaments,

Zhong and Hong (2020) proposed a novel parallel selection framework in which the cham-

pion (i.e., the unknown best) does not have to play with all others to be declared as the best.

In particular, the knockout tournament (KT ) procedures of Zhong and Hong (2020) divide all

alternatives into pairs and construct a “match” between two alternatives in pair, keeping the

winner for the next round “matches” while knocking out the loser after the current round. By

doing so, KT procedures eliminate approximately half of the alternatives at each round and

therefore achieve the theoretical lower bound of E[N ]. The sample-size optimality is achieved

regardless of whether the variances of the alternatives are known or not. However, it will only

change the constants on the optimal upper bounds.

   This structure of KT procedures is perfect for parallel computing in terms of synchroniza-

tion, communication and comparison efficiency. KT procedures can divide all alternatives into

m subsets, and assign each subset to one processor to conduct selections simultaneously among

the alternatives in that subset. Then, neither synchronization nor communication are neces-

sary among different processors until each processor produces a local best alternative. Since all

“matches” in each processor are conducted independently and locally, and CRNs technique can

be easily implemented into KT procedures. In addition, because comparisons are only made

within “matches”, Zhong and Hong (2020) demonstrated that the comparison time in the pro-

cedures is negligible compared with the simulation time. In fact, the number of comparisons is

only half of the total sample size since simulating two observations (i.e., one for each alternative)

is coupled with just a single comparison.



                                                 33
      In each “match”, any existing R&S procedures can be used to determine the winner, and KT

procedures adopt KN procedure to achieve the PCS guarantee and to gain sampling efficiency

on total sample size. The sampling efficiency can be further improved by assigning more than

two alternatives into one “match”, and the PGS guarantee can also be obtained by allocating

the IZ parameter in different rounds.

Procedure 8 KT + Procedure
Require: Number of alternatives k, PCS 1 − α (0 < α < 1 − 1/k), IZ parameter δ > 0, the
first-stage sample size n0 > 2, the parameter λ (0 < λ < δ), number of alternatives g ≥ 2 within
a “match”, and the number of processors m + 1 (i.e., one master and m workers).
 1: Let Irs be the set of alternatives in contention at the beginning of round r in processor s for
    s = 1, 2, . . . , m.
 2: Equally allocate k alternatives to m processors so that each processor handles the selection
    of approximately k/m alternatives, e.g., for i = 1, 2, . . . , k, let,
                                      (i mod m)+1         (i mod m)+1
                                     I1             = I1                ∪ {i} .

 3: for all s = 1, 2, . . . , m do
 4:     Set r = 1.
 5:     while |Irs | > 1 do
 6:              s
            Let Ir+1  = ∅. Group alternatives in Irs with the size of g. In case of leftover ones, let
    them form a group. After grouping, there are in total d|Irs | /ge groups. Let Ir,q       s denote the

    set of the alternatives in group q for q = 1, 2, . . . , d|Irs | /ge of processor s at round r.
 7:         Let αr = α/2r . For each group q = 1, 2, . . . , d|Isr | /ge, set C = Ir,q
                                                                                    s and compute,


                                   s       s
                                                
                                  Ir+1 = Ir+1 ∪ KN (C, αr , δ, n0 ) .

 8:         Set r = r + 1.
 9:     end while
10:     Let Is denote the index of the alternative in Irs .
11:     Take n0 observations from alternative Is . Calculate its sample variance SI2s based on
                                         k
                                             +1, αr = α/2r , and h (αr , m, n0 ), where h (αr , m, n0 )
                                          
    these n0 observations. Set r = logg m
    is the Rinott’s constant determined by αr , m, and n0 .
12:     Set                               ( &                          ')
                                                    h (αr , m, n0 ) SIs 2
                           Nmax,Is = max n0 ,                               ,
                                                             δ
    Then, take additional Nmax,Is − n0 observations from alternative Is .
13:    Compute the sample mean X̄Is (Nmax,Is ).
14: end for
15: Let I denote the set of alternatives containing all the best alternatives produced by m
    processors. Select the alternative with the largest sample mean X̄Is (Nmax,Is ) for Is ∈ I.


      For the simplicity of presentation, we adopt the notation of KN (C, αr , δ, n0 ) in Zhong and

Hong (2020) to denote the output of executing the KN procedure in each “match”, which

provides a PCS of 1 − αr among the alternatives with unknown means and unknown variances

in the set C when the first stage sample size is n0 and the IZ parameter is δ. In the following,

                                                     34
we present the KT + , one of the KT procedures for parallel computing environments of Zhong

and Hong (2020), in Procedure 8.

    We conclude this section by briefly reviewing some other recent works on parallel R&S

problems. Hunter and Nelson (2017) argued that different performance measures and different

formulations are needed for large-scale R&S problems. As a response, Pei et al. (2018) proposed

a different objective function, i.e., the expected false elimination rate (EFER) rather than the

PCS/PGS. They argued that having a sizeable number of alternatives is more reasonable. Ma

(2018) extended the Envelop procedure of Ma and Henderson (2017) to parallel computing

environments, which established a new error bound of Brownian motion processes inspired by

the multi-armed bandit problem of Jamieson et al. (2014). Notice that these abovementioned

procedures using parallel computing are fixed-precision procedures. Some of the well-known

fixed-budget R&S procedures have also been adapted to parallel computing environments. For

instance, Kamiński and Szufel (2018) considered the asynchronization issue as extending both

OCBA and KG procedures in parallel computing environments and discussed the efficiency of

these procedures for small- and large-scale problems.



6     Emerging R&S problems

Besides fixed-precision and fixed-budget R&S problems, some research problems that expend

classical R&S from different perspectives have emerged, e.g., considering multiple performance

measures, taking the input uncertainty into account, and treating the performance measure as

a function of the underlying contexts. In the following, we briefly discuss recent achievements

in these topics, without presenting the detailed procedures.


6.1   Constrained R&S

Traditional R&S problems often focus on only one performance measure. However, in various

practical situations, we may be interested in multiple performance measures. For instance, in

service centers managers are concerned about the expected cost and customer waiting times.

In production systems managers care about not only the expected throughput but also the

associated product quality. One way to deal with multiple performance measures is to model

the primary one as the objective and to model others as constraints. This leads to constrained



                                              35
R&S problems considered in the simulation literature.

   The study by Andradóttir and Kim (2010) is one of the first works in this area. The authors

indicated that the primary and secondary simulation outputs are i.i.d. bi-variate Gaussian

random vectors with unknown mean vector and covariance matrix. They extended the IZ

formulation to this problem and designed fixed-precision procedures that are capable of solving

the problem. Healey et al. (2014) further developed the work of Andradóttir and Kim (2010) to

handle multiple secondary performance measures. Then, Healey et al. (2015) reconsidered the

problem by taking the switching cost into consideration. Rather than modeling the secondary

performance as a Gaussian random vector as all previous works, Hong et al. (2015) perceived the

secondary performance as a Bernoulli random variable and the secondary performance measure

as a probability. Hence, they called the problem a chance-constrained R&S problem. They built

a hypothesis test on the chance constraint, thus resulting in an efficient two-stage procedure

that performs the feasibility check in the first stage and selects the best among all the sample

feasible alternatives in the second stage.

   Different from the IZ formulation of the constrained R&S mentioned above, Lee et al. (2012)

addressed the problem under the OCBA framework. Meanwhile, Hunter and Pasupathy (2013)

and Pasupathy et al. (2015) solved the problem based on the large deviations theory by analyzing

the asymptotic rate of identifying the optimal feasible solution, which is later known as Sampling

Criteria for Optimization using Rate Estimators (SCORE) simulation framework. Recently, Gao

et al. (2018) considered constrained R&S problems in the OCBA formulation, in which they

used large deviations theory and incorporated a quadratic regression metamodel to improve the

efficiency further.


6.2    Multi-objective R&S

Except for the constrained R&S formulation, another way to handle multiple performance

measures is to treat them as simultaneous objectives to optimize, thereby giving rise to the

multi-objective R&S formulation. Multi-objective R&S problems are different from the classic

single-objective R&S problems mainly in two aspects. First, in the multi-objective problems,

that an alternative “dominating” another alternative means that it is better on all objectives.

Therefore, the single “best” alternative that dominates all others may not exist, and the goal

of multi-objective R&S turns to select the set of all non-dominated alternatives, termed by



                                               36
the Pareto set. Second, two types of probabilities are defined to measure the errors when

a dominated alternative is included into the Pareto set and a non-dominated alternative is

excluded from the set.

   Multi-objective R&S procedures are often designed based on traditional R&S procedures.

Interested readers may see Hunter et al. (2019) for a detailed review. Lee et al. (2010) extended

the OCBA procedures to find the sampling allocation rule that minimizes the weighted sum of

the two types of error probabilities. Alternatively, Feldman and Hunter (2018) and Applegate

et al. (2020) derived the optimal sampling allocation rule by adopting the SCORE framework.

Branke and Zhang (2015) supplemented the EVI procedure. At each stage, the new procedure

allocates samples to the alternative that most likely changes the observed Pareto set. Branke

et al. (2016) further developed the KG procedures and allocated the sample at each stage such

that the estimated expected Pareto set is the closest to the true Pareto set.

   The multi-objective procedures above are all designed for fixed budget. Meanwhile, the

literature has also suggested several fixed-precision multi-objective procedures. Batur et al.

(2018) formulated the mean-variance portfolio analysis as a bi-objective R&S problem and

propose a bi-objective procedure under the IZ formulation that controls both types of error

probabilities. Wang and Wan (2017) designed a sequential IZ-free procedure for the multi-

objective procedure based on the generalized sequential likelihood ratio test.


6.3   R&S with input uncertainty

In simulation studies, the input distributions are often estimated from the data and other

information, thus having uncertainty in them. This uncertainty is called input uncertainty.

For instance, when modeling the arrival process of an online service system, multiple plausible

distributions can fit the input historical data, especially when the data set is not sufficiently

large. When specifying the demand curve of a newly launched product, different managers

may have varying beliefs on it. Any distribution of such items can be used as a proxy of the

true input distribution. However, the corresponding “best” alternative may be different. In

other words, no single alternative may be the best for all the possible scenarios of the input

distributions. Then, taking the uncertainty of the simulation model into consideration in making

R&S decisions is an interesting problem in R&S.




                                               37
   Song et al. (2015) studied the impact of input uncertainty on the classic IZ procedures and

found that a straightforward application of IZ procedures may fail to deliver the desired PCS

in the presence of uncertainty. They further proposed an adjustment to provide an average

PCS. However, this average PCS guarantee cannot be delivered for some configurations of the

competing alternatives. Therefore, it is still necessary to design procedures that are able to

address the R&S with input uncertainty.

   To design such procedures, Fan et al. (2013) innovatively proposed a robust selection-of-the-

best (RSB) framework. Particularly, the RSB formulation includes all the possible scenarios

of input distribution into an ambiguity set and then takes a robust perspective to define the

best alternative with respect to the worst-case mean performance measures over the ambiguity

set. Fan et al. (2020) further improved their work and proposed both two-stage and sequential

procedures that can achieve the user-specified PCS. These RSB procedures are also tested by

a healthcare queueing system with both synthetic and real hospital data. Gao et al. (2017)

considered the RSB formulation under the OCBA framework, in which the approximated PCS

is also measured by the worst-case performance. Besides the PCS guarantee, Wu and Zhou

(2019) took the RSB formulation from the fixed-budget viewpoint into account, in which a joint

budget for both collecting input data and running simulations is given in advance.


6.4   R&S with covariates

In some problems, the performance measure of an alternative may vary as a function of some

observable random covariates, which are also known as side information, auxiliary quantities,

or contextual variables. For instance, in healthcare management, the treatment outcome of one

particular drug may depend on the patient’s biometric characteristics. In revenue management,

the best assortment could vary according to customer segmentation. Then, the best alternative

is not universal but depends on the value of underlying covariates (e.g., patient’s biometric

characteristics or customer segmentation), and this type of selection of the best problem is

called R&S with covariates (R&S-C) or contextual R&S.

   Reasonably defining and measuring a correct selection of the best is the first question that

needs to be addressed. Shen et al. (2017) were the first to introduces several definitions of

correct selection for R&S-C from the frequentist perspective. They first defined the conditional

PCS, which is denoted by PCS(x), as the probability of selecting the best alternative (more



                                              38
precisely, the good alternative within IZ) for an individual whose random covariates (denoted by

X) take the value x. Then two forms of unconditional PCS are introduced. One is the average

PCS, i.e., E[PCS(X)]. The other is the worst PCS, i.e., minx∈Ω PCS(x) , where Ω is the support

of X. In both Shen et al. (2017) and the subsequent work Shen et al. (2019), they assumed a

linear model between the mean performance of an alternative and the corresponding covariates.

They developed fixed-precision procedures that can produce selection policies (mapping from

covariates to alternative index) to achieve the desired targets of unconditional PCS. The IZ

formulation in R&S-C is natural and critical, since the mean performance surfaces of alternatives

may intersect somewhere and the performance of different alternatives at the neighborhood

of intersection points can be arbitrarily close or equal. Li et al. (2018) adopted the R&S-C

framework developed by Shen et al. (2017). However they designed new selection procedures to

accommodate the high-dimensional covariates and the general (nonlinear) dependence between

the mean performance of alternatives and the covariates.

    Fixed-budget R&S-C problems have also been tackled under the Bayesian framework, with

the aim of adaptively allocating a given sampling budget to the alternatives and over the domain

of covariates to find the best response across the entire domain of covariates efficiently. Hu and

Ludkovski (2017) proposed to model the performance functions of alternatives as Gaussian ran-

dom fields and used the expected improvement criteria to develop Bayesian procedures. Pearce

and Branke (2017) followed the same setting in Hu and Hu and Ludkovski (2017) and proposed

a KG-based sampling policy with a focus on efficiently estimating the expected improvement

over a continuous domain. Zhang et al. (2020) extended the problem to a more general setting

where the sampling noise can be heteroscedastic and the sampling cost at different locations can

be different. More importantly, they provided a theoretical analysis of the asymptotic behavior

of the KG based policy and proved that the best alternative as a function of the covariates

will be identified almost surely as the number of samples grows. Gao et al. (2019) considered

the case where the covariates only take discrete values and designed an OCBA-based sampling

policy that converges to the asymptotic optimal budget allocation rule.



7    Important research questions on R&S

In this section, we outline six R&S problems that we think are important and yet to be solved.

We will explain why we believe these problems are important. Some of these problems have also


                                               39
been considered in the literature. However, we feel that they deserve more research attention.


   Problem 1: Besides the knockout-tournament procedures and the median-elimination pro-

cedures introduced in Section 5.2, are there other types of rate-optimal fixed-precision large-scale

R&S procedures?

   Reason: Large-scale R&S is at the center stage of today’s R&S research because small-

scale problems have been studied extensively in the literature, and moreover, they are typically

easy to solve with today’s computing resources. The sample-size optimality result of Zhong

and Hong (2020) shows that large-scale problems are fundamentally different from small-scale

problems, and many R&S procedures that are efficient for small-scale problems are not efficient

for large-scale problems. Therefore, more procedures need to be proposed under different parallel

computing frameworks to solve various large-scale R&S problems.


   Problem 2: Are there rate-optimal fixed-budget large-scale R&S procedures?

   Reason: Fixed-budget R&S procedures typically show that their sample-allocation scheme

converges to the optimal scheme of Glynn and Juneja (2004), as shown in Section 4. However,

the optimal scheme depends heavily on the asymptotic regime, i.e., the number of alternatives

stays the same and the total sample size reaches infinity. If the number of alternatives also

goes to infinity, as in Zhong and Hong (2020), it is no longer optimal. Indeed, the optimal

rate of Zhong and Hong (2020) also applies to fixed-budget R&S problems. Therefore, fixed-

budget large-scale R&S procedures that are both rate-optimal and efficient in solving practical

large-scale problems must be designed.


   Problem 3: How can we design effective dynamic-programming-based procedures to solve

fixed-budget R&S problems?

   Reason: As we have shown in Section 4, fixed-budget R&S problems are in essence finite-

time stochastic dynamic programs. However, procedures in the literature are primarily static-

allocation approximations or one-step-look-ahead approximations. There appears no serious

attempt to directly solve the dynamic programs. However, under Bayesian formulation, the

posterior distributions are Gaussian distributions which can be simulated very easily. There-

fore, Monte-Carlo-simulation-based approximate dynamic programming (ADP) or reinforce-

ment learning techniques that consider multiple steps seem applicable. Of course, one also has



                                                40
to demonstrate or quantify both theoretically and numerically that going beyond a single step

may bring actual benefit.


   Problem 4: How can we design fixed-budget R&S procedures that are suitable for parallel

computing environments?

   Reason: As of now, the research attention on parallel R&S seems primarily focused on

fixed-precision procedures. Fixed-budget procedures are often based on dynamic-programming

formulation which requires a significant amount of communications among alternatives to de-

termine a sample-allocation policy. Resourceful approaches need be proposed to avoid excessive

synchronizations and communications in order to implement fixed-budget procedures in parallel

computing environments.


   Problem 5: Do many fixed-precision elimination procedures (e.g., Paulson’s, KN and KT )

that satisfy PCS guarantee also satisfy PGS guarantee?

   Reason: As we reviewed in Section 2, the PCS guarantee requires only a single best, which

must be at least δ larger than all other alternatives. Determining whether a practical problem

satisfies this requirement is generally very difficult. Hence, a PGS guarantee that selects an

alternative in the indifference zone is certainly more reasonable. However, several fixed-precision

elimination procedures (e.g., Paulson’s, KN and KT ) that satisfy the PCS guarantee cannot be

proven to satisfy the PGS guarantee. Some of them may be adjusted to satisfy such guarantee

at the cost of significantly larger sample sizes (Eckman and Henderson, 2018a). To the best of

our knowledge, empirical evidence has shown that Paulson’s, KN and KT always satisfy the

PGS guarantee. Hence, we wonder whether they actually satisfy the PGS guarantee or at least

do under some conditions, e.g., when the number of alternatives is large.


   Problem 6: How to better integrate R&S into optimization-via-simulation (OvS) algo-

rithms?

   Reason: Many OvS algorithms require either keeping the current sample best solution or

selecting from a group of neighboring solutions. These requirements are naturally R&S prob-

lems. Indeed, a number of R&S procedures have been proposed to work with OvS algorithms.

For instance, Boesel et al. (2003) proposed using R&S at the end of the OvS process to select

the best from all visited solutions, which they called “clean-up”. Pichitlamken et al. (2006)



                                                41
propose to use R&S in neighborhood selection. Meanwhile, Hong and Nelson (2007a) consid-

ered methods to ensure that the current best discovered by the OvS algorithm is indeed the

best at any time of the OvS process. In addition, He et al. (2010) and Zhang et al. (2017)

incorporated the OBCA procedures into the cross-entropy and particle swarm OvS algorithms,

respectively. However, besides the clean-up procedure, which requires extra work after the

OvS process is done and provides no information for OvS algorithms to find a better solution,

other ideas tend to slow down the optimization process significantly and output considerably

worse solutions. Therefore, it is interesting to figure out how to integrate R&S into simula-

tion optimization algorithms so that the optimization process may benefit from R&S. Recently,

Eckman and Henderson (2018b) showed that the reuse of the simulation observations from the

optimization process (also called the search process) by a clean-up procedure at the end of the

optimization process may jeopardize the PCS/PGS guarantee. However, without reusing the

simulation observations, R&S-based clean-up procedures may require a significant amount of

simulation observations that may be too expensive to conduct in practice. Therefore, resolving

this issue also imposes a theoretical challenge when integrating R&S into OvS algorithms.

   Naturally, the R&S field has numerous other interesting research problems and emerging

research topics. As computing resources are becoming widely available, in general, increasingly

complicated R&S problems need to be solved.



Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank Prof. Shane Henderson for his insightful and detailed comments

that have significantly improved this paper. This research was supported in part by the National

Natural Science Foundation of China [Grants. 71991473, 71701196, 71722006, and 72031006].



References

Andradóttir, S. and S.-H. Kim (2010). Fully sequential procedures for comparing constrained

  systems via simulation. Naval Research Logistics 57, 403–421.

Applegate, E. A., G. Feldman, S. R. Hunter, and R. Pasupathy (2020). Multi-objective ranking

  and selection: Optimal sampling laws and tractable approximations via SCORE. Journal of

  Simulation, to appear.


                                              42
Banerjee, S. (1961). On confidence interval for two-means problem based on separate estimates

  of variances and tabulated values of t-table. Sankhyā: The Indian Journal of Statistics, Series

  A, 359–378.

Batur, D. and F. Choobineh (2012). Stochastic dominance based comparison for system selec-

  tion. European Journal of Operational Research 220(3), 661 – 672.

Batur, D., L. Wang, and C. F.Fred (2018). Methods for systems selection based on sequential

  mean-variance analysis. INFORMS Journal on Computing 30(4), 724–738.

Bechhofer, R. E. (1954). A single-sample multiple decision procedure for ranking means of

  normal populations with known variances. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics 25, 16–39.

Bechhofer, S. E., T. J. Santner, and D. M. Goldsman (1995). Design and analysis of experiments

  for statistical selection, screening, and multiple comparisons. Wiley.

Bellman, R. (1966). Dynamic programming. Science 153(3731), 34–37.

Bertsekas, D. P. (1995). Dynamic programming and optimal control, Volume 1. Athena scientific

  Belmont, MA.

Boesel, J., B. L. Nelson, and S. H. Kim (2003). Using ranking and selection to “clean up” after

  simulation optimization. Operations Research 51(5), 814–825.

Branke, J., S. E. Chick, and C. Schmidt (2007). Selecting a selection procedure. Management

  Science 53(12), 1916–1932.

Branke, J. and W. Zhang (2015). A new myopic sequential sampling algorithm for multi-

  objective problems. In Proceedings of the 2015 Winter Simulation Conference, pp. 3589–3598.

  IEEE.

Branke, J., W. Zhang, and Y. Tao (2016). Multiobjective ranking and selection based on

  hypervolume. In Proceedings of the 2016 Winter Simulation Conference, pp. 859–870. IEEE.

Bubeck, S. and N. Cesa-Bianchi (2012). Regret analysis of stochastic and nonstochastic multi-

  armed bandit problems. arXiv preprint. arXiv:1204.5721.

Chen, C.-H. (1996). A lower bound for the correct subset-selection probability and its appli-

  cation to discrete-event system simulations. IEEE transactions on automatic control 41(8),

  1227–1231.

                                               43
Chen, C.-H., J. Lin, E. Yücesan, and S. E. Chick (2000). Simulation budget allocation for further

  enhancing the efficiency of ordinal optimization. Discrete Event Dynamic Systems 10(3), 251–

  270.

Chen, E. J. (2005). Using parallel and distributed computing to increase the capability of

  selection procedures. In Proceedings of the 2005 Winter Simulation Conference, pp. 723–731.

  IEEE.

Chick, S. E. (2006). Subjective probability and bayesian methodology. In S. G. Henderson and

  B. L. Nelson (Eds.), Elsevier Handbooks in Operations Research and Management Science:

  Simulation, pp. 225–257. Elsevier.

Chick, S. E., J. Branke, and C. Schmidt (2010). Sequential sampling to myopically maximize

  the expected value of information. INFORMS Journal on Computing 22(1), 71–80.

Chick, S. E. and K. Inoue (2001). New two-stage and sequential procedures for selecting the

  best simulated system. Operations Research 49(5), 732–743.

Clark, G. M. and W. Yang (1986). A bonferroni selection procedure when using commom

  random numbers with unknown variances. In Proceedings of the 1986 Winter Simulation

  Conference, pp. 313–315. IEEE.

Dean, J. and S. Ghemawat (2008). Mapreduce: simplified data processing on large clusters.

  Communications of the ACM 51(1), 107–113.

Eckman, D. J. and S. G. Henderson (2018a). Guarantees on the probability of good selection.

  In Proceedings of the 2018 Winter Simulation Conference, pp. 351–365. IEEE.

Eckman, D. J. and S. G. Henderson (2018b, July). Reusing search data in ranking and selection:

  What could possibly go wrong? ACM Trans. Model. Comput. Simul. 28(3).

Eckman, D. J. and S. G. Henderson (2020). Fixed-confidence, fixed-tolerance guarantees for

  selection-of-the-best procedures. ACM Transactions on Modeling and Computer Simulation,

  to appear.

Even-Dar, E., S. Mannor, and Y. Mansour (2002). Pac bounds for multi-armed bandit and

  markov decision processes. In Proceedings of the 15th Annual Conference on Computational

  Learning Theory, COLT ’02, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 255–270. Springer-Verlag.


                                               44
Even-Dar, E., S. Mannor, and Y. Mansour (2006, June). Action elimination and stopping con-

  ditions for the multi-armed bandit and reinforcement learning problems. Journal of Machine

  Learning Research 7, 1079–1105.

Fabian, V. (1974). Note on Anderson’s sequential procedures with triangular boundary. The

  Annals of Statistics 2, 170–176.

Fan, W., L. J. Hong, and B. L. Nelson (2016). Indifference-zone-free selection of the best.

  Operations Research 64(6), 1499–1514.

Fan, W., L. J. Hong, and X. Zhang (2013). Robust selection of the best. In Proceedings of the

  2013 Winter Simulation Conference, pp. 868–876. IEEE.

Fan, W., L. J. Hong, and X. Zhang (2020). Distributionally robust selection of the best.

  Management Science 66(1), 190–208.

Feldman, G. and S. R. Hunter (2018, January). SCORE allocations for bi-objective ranking

  and selection. ACM Transactions on Modeling and Computer Simulation 28(1), 7:1–7:28.

Frazier, P., W. Powell, and S. Dayanik (2009). The knowledge-gradient policy for correlated

  normal beliefs. INFORMS journal on Computing 21(4), 599–613.

Frazier, P. I. (2014). A fully sequential elimination procedure for indifference-zone ranking and

  selection with tight bounds on probability of correct selection. Operations Research 62(4),

  926–942.

Frazier, P. I., W. B. Powell, and S. Dayanik (2008). A knowledge-gradient policy for sequential

  information collection. SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization 47(5), 2410–2439.

Fu, M. C. and S. G. Henderson (2017). History of seeking better solutions, aka simulation

  optimization. In Proceedings of the 2017 Winter Simulation Conference, pp. 131–157. IEEE.

Fu, M. C., J.-Q. Hu, C.-H. Chen, and X. Xiong (2007). Simulation allocation for determining the

  best design in the presence of correlated sampling. INFORMS Journal on Computing 19(1),

  101–111.

Gabillon, V., M. Ghavamzadeh, and A. Lazaric (2012). Best arm identification: A unified

  approach to fixed budget and fixed confidence. In F. Pereira, C. J. C. Burges, L. Bottou,



                                               45
  and K. Q. Weinberger (Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 25, pp.

  3212–3220. Curran Associates, Inc.

Gao, F., S. Gao, H. Xiao, and Z. Shi (2018). Advancing constrained ranking and selection

  with regression in partitioned domains. IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and

  Engineering 16(1), 382–391.

Gao, S., W. Chen, and L. Shi (2017). A new budget allocation framework for the expected

  opportunity cost. Operations Research 65(3), 787–803.

Gao, S., J. Du, and C.-H. Chen (2019). Selecting the optimal system design under covariates. In

  2019 IEEE 15th International Conference on Automation Science and Engineering (CASE),

  pp. 547–552. IEEE.

Gao, S., H. Xiao, E. Zhou, and W. Chen (2017). Robust ranking and selection with optimal

  computing budget allocation. Automatica 81, 30–36.

Glynn, P. and S. Juneja (2004). A large deviations perspective on ordinal optimization. In

  Proceedings of the 2004 Winter Simulation Conference, pp. 577–585. IEEE.

Glynn, P. and S. Juneja (2018). Selecting the best system and multi-armed bandits. arXiv

  preprint. arXiv:1507.04564.

Goldsman, D., B. L. Nelson, and J. Banks (1998). Comparing systems via simulation. Handbook

  of simulation: Principles, methodology, advances, applications, and practice, 273–306.

Gropp, W., W. D. Gropp, E. Lusk, A. Skjellum, and A. D. F. E. E. Lusk (1999). Using MPI:

  portable parallel programming with the message-passing interface, Volume 1. MIT press.

Gupta, S. (1956). On a decision rule for a problem in ranking means. Ph. D. thesis, University

  of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC.

He, D., S. E. Chick, and C.-H. Chen (2007). Opportunity cost and ocba selection procedures

  in ordinal optimization for a fixed number of alternative systems. IEEE Transactions on

  Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C (Applications and Reviews) 37(5), 951–961.

He, D., L. H. Lee, C.-H. Chen, M. C. Fu, and S. Wasserkrug (2010). Simulation optimization

  using the cross-entropy method with optimal computing budget allocation. ACM Transactions

  on Modeling and Computer Simulation (TOMACS) 20(1), 1–22.

                                              46
Healey, C., S. Andradóttir, and S.-H. Kim (2014). Selection procedures for simulations with mul-

  tiple constraints under independent and correlated sampling. ACM Transactions on Modeling

  and Computer Simulation (TOMACS) 24(3), 14.

Healey, C. M., S. Andradóttir, and S.-H. Kim (2015). A minimal switching procedure for

  constrained ranking and selection under independent or common random numbers. IIE

  Transactions 47(11), 1170–1184.

Hong, J. L., J. Luo, and B. L. Nelson (2015). Chance constrained selection of the best.

  INFORMS Journal on Computing 27(2), 317–334.

Hong, J. L. and B. L. Nelson (2007a). A framework for locally convergent random-search

  algorithms for discrete optimization via simulation. ACM Transactions on Modeling and

  Computer Simulation (TOMACS) 17(4), Article 19.

Hong, L. J. (2006).    Fully sequential indifference-zone selection procedures with variance-

  dependent sampling. Naval Research Logistics 53, 464–476.

Hong, L. J. and B. L. Nelson (2005). The tradeoff between sampling and switching: New

  sequential procedures for indifference-zone selection. IIE Transactions 37(7), 623–634.

Hong, L. J. and B. L. Nelson (2007b). Selecting the best system when systems are revealed

  sequentially. IIE Transactions 39(7), 723–734.

Hong, L. J. and B. L. Nelson (2009). A brief introduction to optimization via simulation. In

  Proceedings of the 2009 Winter Simulation Conference, pp. 75–85. IEEE.

Hong, L. J., B. L. Nelson, and J. Xu (2015). Discrete optimization via simulation. In M. C. Fu

  (Ed.), Handbook of Simulation Optimization. Springer.

Hu, R. and M. Ludkovski (2017). Sequential design for ranking response surfaces. SIAM/ASA

  Journal on Uncertainty Quantification 5(1), 212–239.

Hunter, S. R., E. A. Applegate, V. Arora, B. Chong, K. Cooper, O. Rincón-Guevara, and

  C. Vivas-Valencia (2019). An introduction to multiobjective simulation optimization. ACM

  Transactions on Modeling and Computer Simulation 29(1), 7:1–7:36.

Hunter, S. R. and B. L. Nelson (2017). Parallel ranking and selection. In Advances in Modeling

  and Simulation, pp. 249–275. Springer.

                                               47
Hunter, S. R. and R. Pasupathy (2013). Optimal sampling laws for stochastically constrained

  simulation optimization on finite sets. INFORMS Journal on Computing 25(3), 527–542.

Jamieson, K., M. Malloy, R. Nowak, and S. Bubeck (2014). lil’ucb: An optimal exploration

  algorithm for multi-armed bandits. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 423–439.

Kamiński, B. and P. Szufel (2018). On parallel policies for ranking and selection problems.

  Journal of Applied Statistics 45(9), 1690–1713.

Kao, S. C. and T. L. Lai (1980). Sequential selection procedures based on confidence sequences

  for normal populations. Communications in Statistics-Theory and Methods 9(16), 1657–1676.

Kaufmann, E. and S. Kalyanakrishnan (2013, 12–14 Jun). Information complexity in bandit

  subset selection. Volume 30 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Princeton, NJ,

  USA, pp. 228–251. PMLR.

Kim, S.-H. and B. L. Nelson (2001). A fully sequential procedure for indifference-zone selection

  in simulation. ACM Transactions on Modeling and Computer Simulation (TOMACS) 11(3),

  251–273.

Kim, S.-H. and B. L. Nelson (2006a). On the asymptotic validity of fully sequential selection

  procedures for steady-state simulation. Operations Research 54(3), 475–488.

Kim, S.-H. and B. L. Nelson (2006b). Selecting the best system. In S. G. Henderson and

  B. L. Nelson (Eds.), Elsevier Handbooks in Operations Research and Management Science:

  Simulation, pp. 501–534. Elsevier.

Lee, L. H., T. S. Chew, Ek Peng, and D. Goldsman (2010). Finding the non-dominated pareto

  set for multi-objective simulation models. IIE Transcations 42(9), 656–674.

Lee, L. H., N. A. Pujowidianto, L.-W. Li, C.-H. Chen, and C. M. Yap (2012). Approximate sim-

  ulation budget allocation for selecting the best design in the presence of stochastic constraints.

  IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 57(11), 2940–2945.

Li, X., X. Zhang, and Z. Zheng (2018). Data-driven ranking and selection: high-dimensional

  covariates and general dependence. In Proceedings of the 2018 Winter Simulation Conference,

  pp. 1933–1944. IEEE.




                                                48
Luo, J. and L. J. Hong (2011). Large-scale ranking and selection using cloud computing.

  Proceedings of the 2011 Winter Simulation Conference, 4051–4061.

Luo, J., L. J. Hong, B. L. Nelson, and Y. Wu (2015).           Fully sequential procedures for

  large-scale ranking-and-selection problems in parallel computing environments. Operations

  Research 63(5), 1177–1194.

Ma, S. (2018). Sequential Ranking and Selection Procedures and Sample Complexity. Ph. D.

  thesis, Cornell University.

Ma, S. and S. G. Henderson (2017). An efficient fully sequential selection procedure guaranteeing

  probably approximately correct selection. In Proceedings of the 2017 Winter Simulation

  Conference, pp. 2225–2236. IEEE.

Nelson, B. L. and F. J. Matejcik (1995). Using common random numbers for indifference-zone

  selection and multiple comparisons in simulation. Management Science 41(12), 1935–1945.

Nelson, B. L., J. Swann, D. Goldsman, and W. Song (2001). Simple procedures for selecting

  the best simulated system when the number of alternatives is large. Operations Research 49,

  950–963.

Ni, E. C., D. F. Ciocan, S. G. Henderson, and S. R. Hunter (2015). Comparing message passing

  interface and mapreduce for large-scale parallel ranking and selection. In Proceedings of the

  2015 Winter Simulation Conference, pp. 3858–3867. IEEE.

Ni, E. C., D. F. Ciocan, S. G. Henderson, and S. R. Hunter (2017). Efficient ranking and

  selection in parallel computing environments. Operations Research 65(3), 821–836.

Ni, E. C., S. R. Hunter, and S. G. Henderson (2013). Ranking and selection in a high perfor-

  mance computing environment. In Proceedings of the 2013 Winter Simulation Conference,

  pp. 833–845. IEEE.

Ni, E. C., S. R. Hunter, and S. G. Henderson (2014). A comparison of two parallel ranking

  and selection procedures. In Proceedings of the 2014 Winter Simulation Conference, pp.

  3761–3772. IEEE.

Pasupathy, R., S. R. Hunter, N. A. Pujowidianto, L. H. Lee, and C.-H. Chen (2015). Stochas-

  tically constrained ranking and selection via score. ACM Transactions on Modeling and

  Computer Simulation (TOMACS) 25(1), 1–26.

                                               49
Paulson, E. (1949). A multiple decision procedure for certain problems in the analysis of

  variance. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics 20(1), 95–98.

Paulson, E. (1964). A sequential procedure for selecting the population with the largest mean

  from k normal populations. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics 35(1), 174–180.

Pearce, M. and J. Branke (2017). Efficient expected improvement estimation for continuous

  multiple ranking and selection. In Proceedings of the 2017 Winter Simulation Conference,

  pp. 2161–2172. IEEE.

Pei, L., B. L. Nelson, and S. Hunter (2018). A new framework for parallel ranking & selection

  using an adaptive standard. In Proceedings of the 2018 Winter Simulation Conference, pp.

  2201–2212. IEEE.

Peng, Y., E. K. Chong, C.-H. Chen, and M. C. Fu (2018). Ranking and selection as stochastic

  control. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 63(8), 2359–2373.

Peng, Y., E. K. P. Chong, C. Chen, and M. C. Fu (2018). Ranking and selection as stochastic

  control. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 63(8), 2359–2373.

Peng, Y. and M. C. Fu (2017). Myopic allocation policy with asymptotically optimal sampling

  rate. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 62(4), 2041–2047.

Pichitlamken, J., B. Nelson, and L. Hong (2006, 01). A sequential procedure for neighbor-

  hood selection-of-the-best in optimization via simulation. European Journal of Operational

  Research 173, 283–298.

Rinott, Y. (1978).   On two-stage selection procedures and related probability-inequalities.

  Communications in Statistics-Theory and Methods 7(8), 799–811.

Ryzhov, I. O. (2016). On the convergence rates of expected improvement methods. Operations

  Research 64(6), 1515–1528.

Shen, H., L. J. Hong, and X. Zhang (2017).        Ranking and selection with covariates.   In

  Proceedings of the 2017 Winter Simulation Conference, pp. 169. IEEE.

Shen, H., L. J. Hong, and X. Zhang (2019). Ranking and selection with covariates for person-

  alized decision making. arXiv Preprint. arXiv:1710.02642.



                                             50
Song, E., B. L. Nelson, and L. J. Hong (2015). Input uncertainty and indifference-zone ranking

  & selection. In Proceedings of the 2013 Winter Simulation Conference, pp. 414–424. IEEE.

Tsai, S. C., J. Luo, and C. C. Sung (2017). Combined variance reduction techniques in fully

  sequential selection procedures. Naval Research Logistics (NRL) 64(6), 502–527.

Tsai, S. C. and B. L. Nelson (2009). Fully sequential selection procedures with control variates.

  IIE Transactions 42(1), 71–82.

Wald, A. (1945). Sequential tests of statistical hypotheses. The Annals of Mathematical

  Statistics 16(2), 117–186.

Wald, A. (2004). Sequential Analysis. Courier Corporation.

Wang, W. and H. Wan (2017). Sequential probability ratio test for multiple-objective ranking

  and selection. In Proceedings of the 2017 Winter Simulation Conference, pp. 1998–2009.

  IEEE.

Wilcox, R. R. (1984).          A table for rinott’s selection procedure.    Journal of Quality

  Technology 16(2), 97–100.

Wu, D. and E. Zhou (2019). Fixed confidence ranking and selection under input uncertainty.

  In Proceedings of the 2019 Winter Simulation Conference, pp. 3717–3727. IEEE.

Xie, J., P. Frazier, and S. E. Chick (2016). Bayesian optimization via simulation with pairwise

  sampling and correlated prior beliefs. Operations Research 64(2), 542–559.

Yücesan, E., Y.-C. Luo, C.-H. Chen, and I. Lee (2001). Distributed web-based simulation

  experiments for optimization. Simulation Practice and Theory 9, 73–90.

Zaharia, M., M. Chowdhury, M. J. Franklin, S. Shenker, and I. Stoica (2010). Spark: Cluster

  computing with working sets. HotCloud 10(10-10), 95.

Zhang, S., J. Xu, L. H. Lee, E. P. Chew, W. P. Wong, and C.-H. Chen (2017). Optimal

  computing budget allocation for particle swarm optimization in stochastic optimization. IEEE

  Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 21(2), 206–219.

Zhang, X., H. Shen, L. J. Hong, and L. Ding (2020). Knowledge gradient for selection with

  covariates: Consistency and computation. arXiv Preprint. arXiv:1906.05098.


                                                51
Zhong, Y. and L. J. Hong (2020). Knockout-tournament procedures for large-scale ranking and

  selection in parallel computing environments. Operations Research, to appear.

Zhong, Y., S. Liu, J. Luo, and J. L. Hong (2020). Speeding up paulson’s procedure for large-scale

  problems using parallel computing. INFORMS Journal on Computing, to appear.




                                               52
