                                         Faster Reinforcement Learning by Freezing Slow States

                                                                       Yijia Wang1 and Daniel R. Jiang2,1
                                                                   1
                                                                       University of Pittsburgh, 2 AI at Meta




arXiv:2301.00922v4 [cs.AI] 24 Oct 2025
                                                                                          Abstract

                                                 We study infinite horizon Markov decision processes (MDPs) with fast-slow structure, where
                                              some state variables evolve rapidly (“fast states”) while others change more gradually (“slow
                                              states”). This structure commonly arises in practice when decisions must be made at high
                                              frequencies over long horizons, and where slowly changing information still plays a critical role
                                              in determining optimal actions. Examples include inventory control under slowly changing
                                              demand indicators or dynamic pricing with gradually shifting consumer behavior. Modeling
                                              the problem at the natural decision frequency leads to MDPs with discount factors close to
                                              one, making them computationally challenging. We propose a novel approximation strategy
                                              that “freezes” slow states during phases of lower-level planning and subsequently applies value
                                              iteration to an auxiliary upper-level MDP that evolves on a slower timescale. Freezing states
                                              for short periods of time leads to easier-to-solve lower-level problems, while a slower upper-level
                                              timescale allows for a more favorable discount factor. On the theoretical side, we analyze the
                                              regret incurred by our frozen-state approach, which leads to simple insights on how to trade
                                              off regret versus computational cost. Empirically, we benchmark our new frozen-state methods
                                              on three domains, (i) inventory control with fixed order costs, (ii) a gridworld problem with
                                              spatial tasks, and (iii) dynamic pricing with reference-price effects. We demonstrate that the
                                              new methods produce high-quality policies with significantly less computation, and we show
                                              that simply omitting slow states is often a poor heuristic.



                                         1   Introduction

                                         Markov decision processes (MDPs) offer a foundational framework for modeling sequential decision

                                         making under uncertainty. In many real-world applications, decisions must be made at high fre-

                                                                                              1
quencies over extended time horizons. From a modeling standpoint, this translates into MDPs with

discount factors close to one (which captures the long-term nature of the objective). However, such

long-horizon problems can pose computational challenges: standard algorithms like value iteration

(VI), which is a core building block in many reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms, rely on the

contraction property of the Bellman operator to guarantee convergence. As the discount factor

approaches one, this contraction weakens, leading to slow convergence and degraded performance

within a given computational budget (Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis, 1996; Jiang et al., 2015).

   In a wide range of applications, state variables naturally evolve at different timescales. For

example, in inventory control problems, the inventory level may fluctuate rapidly from one period

to the next, while exogenous factors that influence demand may evolve more gradually. In dynamic

pricing problems, the (endogenous) price history can change frequently, but user behavior shifts

more slowly. We refer to this as fast-slow structure, where the state decomposes into fast-evolving

and slow-evolving components. Although slow states may evolve gradually, they often encode critical

contextual information, and omitting them can result in suboptimal policies and high regret.

   Solving MDPs that fully capture both fast and slow dynamics at the natural decision frequency

typically requires long effective horizons, which can pose serious computational burdens. To manage

complexity, practitioners often resort to simplifying assumptions, such as fixing or omitting slow

states altogether. While this reduces computational burden, it can degrade policy quality by dis-

carding important information. This paper introduces and formalizes the notion of fast-slow MDPs,

and studies the computational implications of a novel approximation strategy called frozen-state

value iteration (FSVI).


1.1   Main Contributions

In this paper, we propose an approximation strategy that uses two levels of planning, aiming to

provide a middle ground between solving the full MDP and completely ignoring slow states. In

our approach, we first temporarily “freeze” the slow state during lower-level planning. Concretely,

we compute policies based on finite-horizon MDPs that are conditioned on a fixed slow state.

Subsequently, we apply value iteration to an auxiliary upper-level MDP that evolves on a slower

timescale by leveraging the lower-level policies. This approach makes the lower-level problems more

tractable, while the slower upper-level dynamics enable the use of a more favorable (i.e., smaller)

                                                 2
effective discount factor. Specifically, we make the following contributions:

  1. We first formally define a fast-slow MDP and provide an (exact) reformulation into an MDP

     with hierarchical structure. The upper level is a slow-timescale infinite horizon MDP and

     the lower level is a fast-timescale finite horizon MDP with T periods. One period of the

     upper-level problem is composed of a complete lower-level problem.

  2. We propose a frozen-state approximation to the reformulated MDP, along with an associated

     frozen-state value iteration (FSVI) algorithm, where the slow state is frozen in the lower-level

     problem, while each period in the upper-level problem “releases” the slow state. Computational

     benefits arise in several ways: (1) frozen states simplify the dynamics of the lower-level MDP

     (fewer successor states), (2) the discount factor in the upper-level problem is more favorable

     due to the reuse of the lower-level policy, which is computed only once, (3) the lower-level MDP

     thus becomes separable into independent MDPs, opening the door to speedups via parallel

     computation. Solving the frozen-state approximation gives a policy that switches between

     one action from upper-level policy and T − 1 actions from the lower-level policy. We give a

     theoretical analysis that upper bounds the expected regret from applying this policy compared

     to the optimal policy.

  3. We adapt our frozen-state approach to a more practical reinforcement learning setting where

     a generative model (or simulator) is available but the MDP is not fully known. Specifically, we

     develop frozen-state fitted value iteration (FSFVI), a version of fitted value iteration (Munos

     and Szepesvári, 2008) that incorporates our two-level planning strategy. FSFVI can learn

     effective policies from sampled transitions, making our method applicable to model-free or

     simulation-based environments. We also provide a theoretical regret bound for a special case

     of FSFVI using linear function approximation (see Appendix C).

  4. Lastly, we perform a systematic empirical study on three problem settings: (1) inventory con-

     trol with fixed costs, (2) gridworld with spatial tasks, and (3) dynamic pricing with reference

     effects. We show that our proposed algorithms (based on the frozen-state approximation)

     quickly converge to good policies using significantly less computation compared to standard

     methods. Notably, our results show that ignoring the slow state, i.e., modeling the system as


                                                  3
         if the true state variable only includes the fast component,1 leads to poor results.



2       Related Work

In this section, we provide a brief review of related literature. First, there exists a stream of lit-

erature focused on sequential decision making problems with exact hierarchical, multi-timescale

structure. Chang et al. (2003) study multi-timescale MDPs, which are composed of M different

decisions that are made on M different discrete timescales. The authors consider the impact of

upper-level states and actions on the transition of the lower levels, an idea that is also present in

our fast-slow framework. Multi-timescale MDPs have often been applied in supply chain problems,

including production planning in semiconductor fabrication (Panigrahi and Bhatnagar, 2004; Bhat-

nagar and Panigrahi, 2006), hydropower portfolio management (Zhu et al., 2006), and strategic

network growth for reverse supply chains (Wongthatsanekorn et al., 2010). Wang et al. (2018)

propose a row-generation-based algorithm to solve a linear programming formulation of the multi-

timescale MDP. Jacobson et al. (1999) consider “piecewise stationary” MDPs, where the transition

and reward functions are “renewed” every N + 1 periods, motivated by problems where routine de-

cisions are periodically interrupted by higher-level decisions. For the case of large renewal periods,

they propose a policy called the “initially stationary policy” which uses a fixed decision rule for some

number of initial periods in each renewal cycle. Our fast-slow model focuses on a novel fast-slow

structure present in many MDPs and unlike the above work, does not assume any natural/exact

hierarchical structure. Instead, we focus on how a particular type of (frozen-state) hierarchical

structure can be used as an approximation to the true MDP. However, we note that many MDPs

with natural two-timescale structure can also fit into our framework, and therefore, given that

perspective, our model can be viewed as a generalization.

       Our proposed frozen-state algorithms are also related to literature on hierarchical reinforce-

ment learning, which are methods that artificially decompose a complex problem into smaller sub-

problems (Barto and Mahadevan, 2003). Approaches include the options framework (Sutton et al.,

1999), the hierarchies of abstract machines (HAMs) approach (Parr and Russell, 1998), and MAXQ

value function decomposition (Dietterich, 2000).

1
    See Appendix B.1 for details on how we simulate this behavior in our experiments.


                                                          4
   Out of these three approaches, the options framework is most closely related to this paper. A

Markov option (also called a macro-action or temporally extended action) is composed of a policy, a

termination condition, and an initiation set (Sutton et al., 1999; Precup, 2000). One of the biggest

challenges is to automatically construct options that can effectively speed up reinforcement learning.

A large portion of work in this direction is based on subgoals, states that might be beneficial to reach

(Digney, 1998; McGovern and Barto, 2001; Jonsson and Barto, 2005; Ciosek and Silver, 2015; Wang

et al., 2022). The subgoals are identified by utilizing the learned model of the environment (Menache

et al., 2002; Mannor et al., 2004; Şimşek and Barto, 2004; Şimşek et al., 2005), or through trajectories

without learning a model (McGovern and Barto, 2001; Stolle and Precup, 2002).

   The options (and subgoals) framework is largely motivated by robotics and navigation-related

tasks, while we are particularly interested in solving problems that arise in the operations research

and operations management domains. The problems that we study do not decompose naturally

into “subgoals,” leading us to identify and focus on the fast-slow structure, which does indeed arise

naturally for many problems of interest.

   Another work that is related to the options framework is Song and Xu (2020), who divide

finite-horizon MDPs into two sub-problems along the time horizon, and concatenate their optimal

solutions to generate an overall solution. Our paper also, in a sense, divides MDPs along the time

horizon, but our work is quite different from that of Song and Xu (2020) in that we work on infinite

horizon problems and convert them into auxiliary problems that operate on a slower timescale,

which takes advantage of reusable lower-level policies. More importantly, the various methods we

propose all build on the idea of freezing certain states to reduce computational cost, which is unique

to our approach and, to our knowledge, this is a novel direction that has not been proposed before.

   Finally, our work contributes to the broader literature on leveraging MDP structure to improve

reinforcement learning and approximate dynamic programming algorithms. Prior research has ex-

ploited structural properties of the value function, such as convexity (Pereira and Pinto, 1991;

Philpott and Guan, 2008; Nascimento and Powell, 2009; Benjaafar et al., 2022) and monotonicity

(Papadaki and Powell, 2002; Jiang and Powell, 2015a), as well as structural features of the optimal

policy (Kunnumkal and Topaloglu, 2008). Additional examples include factored MDPs (Osband

and Van Roy, 2014) and weakly-coupled systems (Killian et al., 2021; El Shar and Jiang, 2023;

Brown and Smith, 2025; Nadarajah and Cire, 2025). Our contribution to this line of work lies

                                                   5
in identifying a new form of MDP structure, which then informs the design of a new algorithmic

approach.



3       Fast-Slow MDPs

In this section, we introduce the base model, the original MDP to be solved and formally introduce

the notion of a fast-slow MDP. We then provide a hierarchical reformulation of the base model using

fixed-horizon policies, and show the equivalence (in optimal value) between the two models. Due

to the considerable amount of notation in this paper, we provide a table of notation in Table 1 for

reference.


3.1       Base Model

Consider a discrete-time MDP ⟨S, A, W, f, r, γ⟩, where S is the finite state space, A is the finite

action space, W is the space of possible realizations of an exogenous, independent and identically

distributed (i.i.d.) noise process {wt } defined on a discrete probability space (Ω, F , P), f : S ×

A × W → S is the transition function, r : S × A → [0, rmax ] is the bounded reward function, and

γ ∈ [0, 1) is the discount factor for future rewards (Puterman, 2014). The objective is
                                                   "∞                                     #
                                                    X
                                 U ∗ (s) = max E           γ t r st , νt (st )                                 (1)
                                                                                 
                                                                                     s0 = s ,
                                           {νt }
                                                     t=0


where states transition according to st+1 = f (st , at , wt+1 ) and we optimize over sequences of policies

νt : S → A, which are deterministic mappings from states to actions. The expectation is taken over

exogenous noise process {wt }∞
                             t=1 . We assume throughout that S, A, X , Y, S × A, and X × Y are

equipped with the Euclidean metric,2 which is naturally the case for many applications.

Assumption 1 (Separability and the Fast-Slow Property). Suppose the following hold:

    (i) The state space S is separable and can be written as S = X × Y. We call X the “slow state

         space” and Y the “fast state space.”

2
    However, as long as the relevant spaces are metric spaces, the framework continues to hold. We choose Euclidean
    metrics as they are natural for our applications.




                                                            6
(ii) Let st = (xt , yt ) ∈ S, where xt ∈ X is the slow state and yt ∈ Y the fast state, at ∈ A,

             and wt+1 ∈ W. The transition dynamics st+1 = f (st , at , wt+1 ) ∈ S can be written with the

             notation:


                         xt+1 = fX (xt , yt , at , wt+1 ) ∈ X         and   yt+1 = fY (xt , yt , at , wt+1 ) ∈ Y,


             for some fX : S × A × W → X and fY : S × A × W → Y.



 Symbol                  Description
 S                       State space, with generic element s ∈ S
 X                       Slow state space, with generic element x ∈ X
 Y                       Fast state space, with generic element y ∈ Y
 A                       Action space, with generic element a ∈ A
 W                       Exogenous noise space, with generic element w ∈ W
 f                       Transition function: f : S × A × W → S
 fX                      Slow state transition: fX : S × A × W → X
 fY                      Fast state transition: fY : S × A × W → Y
 r                       Reward function: r : S × A → [0, rmax ]
 γ                       Discount factor
 α                       Constant in the fast-slow property controlling changes in slow state
 dY                      Bound on the one-step change in the fast state
 T                       Number of periods in the lower-level problem
     ∗
 U                       Optimal value function of the base MDP
     ∗
 ν                       The optimal policy for the base MDP
 Lr , Lf , LU            Lipschitz constants for r, f , and U ∗
 (µ, π)                  Generic T -period policy with upper-level policy µ and lower-level policy π = (π1 , . . . , πT −1 )
 R(s0 , µ(s0 ), π)       T -period reward of hierarchical reformulation associated with T -period policy (µ, π)
         ∗     ∗
 (µ , π )                The optimal policy for the hierarchical reformulation; has same value as ν ∗
 R̃(s0 , a, J1 )         Approximation to T -period reward using lower-level value function approximation J1
 Jt∗ , V k               Lower- and upper-level value function approximation used in FSVI
         k     ∗
 (µ̃ , π̃ )              Output policy of FSVI after k iterations
     i
 U                       Value function approximation used in base VI
     k
 ν                       Output policy of base VI after k iterations
 H                       Bellman operator for the base MDP
 H̃                      Bellman operator for lower-level frozen-state problem (discount factor γ)
 FJ1 ,π                  Bellman operator for upper-level problem given lower-level J1 and π (discount factor γ T )


                         Table 1: Frequently used notation in the fast-slow MDP framework.



                                                                  7
(iii) For any state (x, y) ∈ S, action a ∈ A, and exogenous noise w ∈ W, suppose the one-step

      transitions of x and y satisfy:


                          y − fY (x, y, a, w) 2 ≤ dY     and      x − fX (x, y, a, w) 2 ≤ αdY ,


      for some dY < ∞ and α ∈ [0, 1].


Remark 1. Note that one particularly instructive example is the case of exogenous slow states,

where xt+1 = fX (xt , wt+1 ). Here, the transition does not depend on the action at , nor does it

depend on the fast state yt . Such a model is common in practice: examples of exogenous slow states

include prices, weather conditions, and other environmental variables that are not influenced by the

decision maker’s actions or the states of the primary system. See, e.g., Yu and Mannor (2009), who

study a related model called the “arbitrarily modulated MDP.”

Assumption 2 (Lipschitz Properties). Suppose that the reward function r, transition function f ,

and optimal value function U ∗ are Lipschitz with respect to ∥ · ∥2 :


                                     |r(s, a) − r(s′ , a′ )| ≤ Lr (s, a) − (s′ , a′ ) 2 ,                (2)

                             f (s, a, w) − f (s′ , a′ , w) 2 ≤ Lf (s, a) − (s′ , a′ ) 2 ,                (3)

                                      U ∗ (s) − U ∗ (s′ ) 2 ≤ LU s − s′ 2 ,                              (4)


for some Lipschitz constants Lr , Lf , and LU . Lipschitz assumptions are common in the literature;

see, for example, Ok et al. (2018), Domingues et al. (2021), Sinclair et al. (2020), and Sinclair

et al. (2022). In Appendix F, we give bounds on LU in terms of Lr and Lf . While we could have

used those results directly and omitted the assumption on LU , we opt to include (4) to increase the

clarity of our results.

Definition 1 (Fast-Slow MDP). An MDP ⟨S, A, W, f, r, γ⟩ is called a (α, dY )-fast-slow MDP if

Assumptions 1 and 2 are satisfied.

     Given any state (x, y), noise w, and policy ν, we use the notation f ν (x, y, w) = f (x, y, ν(x, y), w),

fXν (x, y, w) = fX x, y, ν(x, y), w , fYν (x, y, w) = fY x, y, ν(x, y), w , and r(x, y, ν) = r(x, y, ν(x, y))
                                                                        



                                                         8
throughout the paper. The value of a stationary policy3 ν at state (x, y) is the expected cumulative

reward starting from state (x, y) following policy ν, i.e.,
                               "∞                                                  #
                                X
              U ν (x, y) = E         γ t r xt , yt , ν           (x0 , y0 ) = (x, y) = r x, y, ν + γ E U ν (x′ , y ′ ) ,
                                                                                                                   
                               t=0


where (x′ , y ′ ) = f ν (x, y, w) and (xt+1 , yt+1 ) = f ν (xt , yt , wt ) for all t. The optimal value function at

state U ∗ (x, y), as defined in (1), satisfies the Bellman equation, i.e.,


                                     U ∗ (x, y) = max r(x, y, a) + γ E U ∗ (x′ , y ′ ) .                                   (5)
                                                                                     
                                                             a



Denote by H the Bellman operator of the base model; for any state (x, y) and value function U ,


                                                                                                                           (6)
                                                                                   
                               (HU )(x, y) = max r(x, y, a) + γ E U (f (x, y, a, w)) .
                                                         a



A policy that is greedy with respect to the optimal value function, i.e.,


                                 ν ∗ (x, y) = arg max r(x, y, a) + γ E U ∗ (x′ , y ′ ) .
                                                                                     
                                                             a


                                                                                                                 ∗
is an optimal policy, and the optimal value U ∗ and the value of the optimal policy U ν are the same.


3.2       Hierarchical Reformulation using Fixed-Horizon Policies

In this section, we derive an exact hierarchical reformulation with the original timescale broken up

into groups of T periods each. The reformulation holds for a general MDP ⟨S, A, W, f, r, γ⟩, but

the concepts that we introduce in this section will serve as the basis for developing our frozen-state

computational approach for fast-slow MDPs.

       Denote (µ, π) a T -horizon policy, which is a sequence of T policies (µ, π1 , . . . , πT −1 ), µ : S → A,

πt : S → A and π = (π1 , . . . , πT −1 ). Following (µ, π) means that we take the first action according

to µ and then next T − 1 actions according to π. Given any state s0 , the T -period reward function

3
    It is well-known that there exists an optimal policy to (1) that is both stationary and deterministic. See Puterman
    (2014).




                                                                        9
(of the base model) associated with (µ, π) is written as:

                                                                      T
                                                                      X −1
                                    R(s0 , µ(s0 ), π) = r(s0 , µ) +          γ t r(st , πt ),                 (7)
                                                                      t=1


where s1 = f µ (s0 , w1 ) and st+1 = f πt (st , wt+1 ) for t > 0.

    A T -periodic policy (µ, π) refers to the infinite sequence that repeatedly applies the T -horizon

policy (µ, π), i.e., (µ, π, µ, π, . . .). Note that despite it not being a stationary policy, the T -periodic

policy (µ, π) can be implemented in the infinite horizon problem defined in (1). The value of the

T -periodic policy (µ, π) at state s0 is
                            "∞                                   #
                             X
        Ū µ (s0 , π) = E         γ kT R(sk , µ(sk ), π) s0 = s = E R(s0 , µ(s0 ), π) + γ T Ū µ (sT , π) ,
                                                                                                        

                            k=0


where, again, s1 = f µ (s0 , w1 ) and st+1 = f πt (st , wt+1 ) for t > 0 within each cycle of T periods.

Figure 1 compares stationary policy ν and a T -periodic policy (µ, π) for the case of T = 4. In the

figure, we also illustrate how rewards can be written in an “aggregated” fashion over the T periods

using (7).


                 ν           ν          ν             ν     ν          ν             ν          ν    ⋯


                 μ          π1          π2        π3        μ          π1            π2         π3   ⋯


                            R(s0, μ(s0), π)                           R(s4, μ(s4), π)


Figure 1: Illustration of a stationary policy µ (upper timeline) and a T -periodic policy (µ, π) (lower timeline)
for T = 4. The periods covered by the T -period reward associated with (µ, π) is visualized with brackets in
the lower timeline.


    The optimal value function satisfies the following Bellman equation:


                                  Ū ∗ (s0 ) = max E R(s0 , µ(s0 ), π) + γ T Ū ∗ (sT ) ,                     (8)
                                                                                      
                                              (µ,π)


where the “action” now involves selecting the π as well. Denote (µ∗ , π ∗ ) an optimal T -periodic

policy, which solves (8). In Proposition 3.1, we prove that the base model (5) and the hierarchical

                                                            10
reformulation (8) are equivalent in a certain sense.

Proposition 3.1. Given an MDP ⟨S, A, W, f, r, γ⟩, the following hold:

    (i) The optimal value of the base model (5) is equal to the optimal value of the hierarchical refor-

       mulation (8), i.e., U ∗ = Ū ∗ .

 (ii) An optimal stationary policy ν ∗ with respect to the base model (5) is also an optimal policy for
                                                            ∗
       the hierarchical reformulation (8), i.e., Ū ∗ = Ū ν .

Proof. See Appendix D.2.

     Part (i) of Proposition 3.1 is most relevant to our situation in the sense that the optimal T -

periodic policy (µ∗ , π ∗ ) is no better than the stationary optimal policy ν ∗ . Therefore, solving the

hierarchical reformulation (8) allows us to achieve the same value as the ν ∗ , the optimal policy to

the original base model (5).

     Note that, at this point, we have simply reformulated the problem, but (8) is no easier to solve

than (5). Despite the more favorable discount factor γ T in (8), its action space is now effectively

the space of T -horizon policies, rather than a single action a. In the next section, we propose an

approximation that allows us to fix a lower-level policy π and only optimize µ. This allows us to

enjoy the γ T discount factor while maintaining the same action space.



4      The Frozen-State Approximation

We propose a frozen-state approximation, where we make two simplifications to the T -period finite-

horizon problem with terminal value U ∗ that is embedded in each T -period “time step” of (8),

termed the lower-level problem. First, motivated by the slow transitions of x given in Assumption

1, we “freeze” slow states for all T periods of the lower-level problem, and second, we decouple the

problem from the main MDP by solving an approximation with zero terminal value instead of U ∗ .

     The first simplification reduces the computation needed to solve the finite-horizon MDP. The

second simplification, due to the decoupling from the main problem, allows us to pre-compute an

approximation to π ∗ , which we denote π̃ ∗ . By then fixing π̃ ∗ , we are able to construct an auxiliary

problem that proceeds at a timescale that is a factor of T slower than the MDP of the base model


                                                      11
(equivalently, the discount factor becomes γ T instead of γ), yet optimizing over the same action

space. This naturally leads to algorithms with computational benefits (see Section 5). The number

of periods T to freeze the state is a parameter to the approach. See Figure 2 for a high-level

illustration; we provide a detailed description of the approach in the next few sections.



          π*
           1
                      π*
                       2
                                    π*
                                     3
                                                                            π̃*1         π̃*2           π̃*3
                                                          U*                                                        J*
                                                                                                                     T
                                                                                                                       ≡0
        x1, y1      x2, y2         x3, y3                                  x1, y1       x1, y2         x1, y3


(a) The lower-level problem (i.e., optimizing over π) em- (b) The lower-level problem of the frozen-state approxi-
bedded in (8).                                            mation, with frozen x1 and JT∗ instead of U ∗ .

Figure 2: A comparison of the lower-level problem of the hierarchical reformulation vs the lower-level problem
of the frozen-state approximation.



Remark 2. It is important to note that the freezing of states only occurs “within the algorithm” as a

step toward more efficient computation of policies. Our resulting policies are then implemented in the

underlying base model MDP, which proceeds naturally according to its true dynamics. Our theoretical

and empirical results always attempt to answer the question: how well does an approximate policy,

which is computed by pretending certain states are frozen, perform in the true model?


4.1       The Lower-Level MDP (Frozen Slow States)

We view the problem from period 1 to period T as the “lower level” of the frozen-state approxima-

tion.4 To form the lower-level problem of the frozen-state approximation, we consider this T − 1

period problem in isolation:

                                   "T −1                                                     #
                                    X
                 J1π̃ (x, y) = E           γ   t−1
                                                     r(x1 , yt , π̃t ) (x1 , y1 ) = (x, y)       and    max J1π̃ (x, y)     (9)
                                                                                                          π̃
                                    t=1


where xt+1 = xt = x remains frozen, yt+1 = fYπ̃t (x, yt , wt+1 ), and π̃ = (π̃1 , . . . , π̃T −1 ). The problem

(9) can be solved using backward dynamic programming: accordingly, let the terminal JT∗ ≡ 0 and

4
    This corresponds to the periods relevant to π from (µ, π) in the hierarchical reformulation (8), whose structure the
    frozen-state approximation mimics.



                                                                      12
for t = 1, 2, . . . , T − 1, let


                                     Jt∗ (x, y) = max r(x, y, a) + γ E Jt+1
                                                                       ∗
                                                                            (x, y ′ ) ,                           (10)
                                                                                     
                                                      a



where y ′ = fY (x, y, a, w). We also have the standard recursion for the performance of a policy:


                              Jtπ̃ (x, y) = r(x, y, π̃t (x, y)) + γ E Jtπ̃ (x, fYπ̃t (x, y, wt+1 )) ,             (11)
                                                                                                  



with JTπ̃ ≡ 0. We denote by H̃ the Bellman operator of the lower-level problem, which is on the

same timescale as the base model (hence, the discount factor is γ) and looks similar to the Bellman

operator H defined in (6), but the transition of the slow-state x is frozen. For any state (x, y) and

lower-level value function Jt+1 ,5 define:


                                                                                                                  (12)
                                                                                      
                          H̃Jt+1 (x, y) = max r(x, y, a) + γ E Jt+1 (x, fY (x, y, a, w)) .
                                                  a



Note that (12) can be viewed as an approximation to (6). Analogously, let H̄ π̃ be the Bellman

operator associated with (11).

       Also, let π̃ ∗ = (π̃1∗ , . . . , π̃T∗ −1 ) be the finite-horizon policy that is greedy with respect to Jt∗ :


                                   π̃t∗ (x, y) = arg max r(x, y, a) + γ E Jt+1
                                                                          ∗
                                                                               (x, y ′ ) .
                                                                                        
                                                      a


Note that using JT∗ ≡ 0 is aligned with the fact that the lower-level problem (9) contains T − 1
                                           ∗
periods. It thus follows that J1π̃ = J1∗ , meaning that we can use J1∗ to represent the value of the

lower-level problem. We will see in the next section that the upper-level problem depends on an
                          ∗
approximation of J1π̃ , which is the value of the lower-level policy in T −1 periods (and zero terminal

value after that).

Remark 3 (Non-zero terminal value). What about when one wants to solve the lower-level problem

with some JT∗ ̸= 0? In some applications, it may be natural or desirable to assign a non-zero terminal

value at time T . This would allow for a heuristic continuation value based on the algorithm designer’s

5
    We include time indexing on the value function to emphasize that this Bellman operator is used in a finite-horizon
    (i.e., non-stationary) setting, but the definition of H̃ itself does not depend on t.


                                                                13
domain knowledge. In this case, the lower-level policy π̃ ∗ can still be computed using finite-horizon

dynamic programming, starting from the non-zero JT∗ as the terminal condition in the recursion (10).

However, for consistency of the upper-level problem, it is important to evaluate the performance of

the resulting policy π̃ ∗ using the original objective (9) (without the terminal value). In other words,
                       ∗
when JT∗ ̸= 0, J1π̃ is no longer guaranteed to be the same as J1∗ . Therefore, to use a non-zero
                                                                                                         ∗
terminal value, we need to perform an additional policy evaluation step for π̃ ∗ to obtain J1π̃ . This

is a relatively simple one-time calculation that can be performed concurrently with the computation

of π̃ ∗ . We assume throughout the paper that JT∗ ≡ 0 for simplicity.

       It may not immediately be clear why freezing slow states is desired. There are two main com-

putational benefits to solving (10) instead of an analogous version of (10) without freezing x:

      • In algorithms like value iteration (Puterman, 2014), each update requires computing expecta-

         tions over successor states, and therefore the number of successor states impacts the number

         of operations for each step of value iteration. When x is frozen, the number of successor states

         is much smaller since we only have successor fast states (y ′ ): in other words, we only need to

         compute E Jt+1  (x, y ′ ) instead of E Jt+1 (x′ , y ′ ) .6
                    ∗                         ∗              


      • Second, (10) can effectively be viewed as |X | independent MDPs, one for each x ∈ X , allowing

         for the possibility of computing the policy with additional parallelism.


4.2       The Upper-Level MDP (True State Dynamics)

Let us now consider the upper-level problem of the frozen-state approximation, which is an infinite

horizon problem with groups of T periods aggregated. Denote the stationary upper-level policy by

µ : S → A, which is the policy that we are attempting to optimize in the upper-level problem. The

upper-level problem takes two “inputs” related to the lower-level problem: (1) J1 , an approximation

of the optimal lower-level value J1∗ , (2) π, a lower-level finite-horizon policy. Fixing these inputs,

the value at state s0 = (x0 , y0 ) by executing policy µ is


                           V µ (s0 , J1 , π) = E R̃(s0 , µ(s0 ), J1 ) + γ T V µ (sT (µ, π), J1 , π) ,
                                                                                                  


6
    Even in the case that the expectation is approximated via sampling, the former requires sampling from a lower-
    dimensional successor state distribution.


                                                              14
where sT (µ, π) is the state reached according to the true system dynamics by following (µ, π),

starting from s0 and

                                                                                                                (13)
                                                                                     
                                  R̃(s0 , a, J1 ) = r(s0 , a) + γ J1 f (s0 , a, w)

is a one-step approximation to the T -period reward function R, defined in (7). Figure 3 helps to

visualize the upper-level MDP.


                                 γT



            μ          π1         π2           π3        μ           π1         π2         π3        ⋯

            x0         x1         x1           x1        x4          x5         x5          x5
                 J1                                           J1

Figure 3: Illustration of the upper-level problem. Notably, the discount factor is γ T and the reward function,
from the point of view of µ, depends on the lower-level value function J1 . This value function is computed
by freezing states, as visualized by the grey box.


    The optimal value (for this approximation) at state s0 can be written as


                      V ∗ (s0 , J1 , π) = max E R̃(s0 , a, J1 ) + γ T V ∗ (sT (a, π), J1 , π) ,                 (14)
                                                                                            
                                           a



where sT (a, π) is the state reached according to the true system dynamics by first taking action a

and then following π, starting from s0 .

    Throughout the paper, we use the notations V µ (J1 , π) : S → R and V ∗ (J1 , π) : S → R to

refer to the value function obtained when the MDP is evaluated or solved for a fixed J1 and π,

respectively. We also define the Bellman operator associated with (14):


                            FJ1 ,π V (s0 ) = max E R̃(s0 , a, J1 ) + γ T V (sT (a, π)) ,                        (15)
                                                                                    
                                                a



which will become useful later on.

    Recall that the optimal lower-level policy (for the frozen-state model) is denoted π̃ ∗ and its

optimal value is J1∗ . Let µ̃∗ be the optimal upper-level policy corresponding to these inputs, i.e., the

policy that is greedy with respect to V ∗ (s0 , J1∗ , π̃ ∗ ). Thus, (µ̃∗ , π̃ ∗ ) is the resulting T -periodic policy


                                                         15
from the frozen-state hierarchical approximation; we refer to it as the T -periodic frozen-state policy.



5     Frozen-State Value Iteration

In this section, we introduce the our new approach: the frozen-state value iteration (FSVI) algo-

rithm. We start by mentioning that the naive approach to solving the base model MDP (5) is to

directly apply standard VI (see, e.g., Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis (1996)). For completeness, we provide

the full description of standard VI in Algorithm 1.

    Our new approach, FSVI, is given in Algorithm 2. The main ideas of the algorithm are:

    1. Solve the lower-level MDP with frozen states to obtain a policy π̃ ∗ and its value J1∗ . Since

      the lower-level problem is a finite horizon MDP, it can be solved exactly using T − 1 steps of

      VI. An alternative way of viewing the lower-level problem is that it is |X | independent MDPs,

      which we can potentially solve in parallel. Note that Algorithm 2 emphasizes this by looping

      over the slow state x ∈ X in Line 1.

    2. Apply value iteration (VI) to the upper-level problem starting with some initial value function

      V 0 , while using J1∗ to approximate the T -horizon reward and π̃ ∗ for T -step transitions. Note

      that this is an infinite-horizon MDP that operates at a slower timescale and enjoys a more

      favorable discount factor of γ T .

    We denote the resulting value function approximation after k iterations of value iteration as V k ,

from which we obtain a policy µ̃k . The T -periodic policy output by FSVI is formed by combining

µ̃k with the optimal finite-horizon policy π̃ ∗ from the lower-level MDP: (µ̃k , π̃ ∗ ).


5.1    Natural Application Domains for FSVI

While the FSVI algorithm is general and can be applied to any MDP, we do not necessarily expect

it to perform well in any arbitrary setting. Its approximation relies heavily on a separation of

timescales and on the idea that some form of structured behavior can be captured by freezing slow

variables over short horizons. That said, there are two broad classes of problems where we expect

FSVI to work particularly well:




                                                    16
 Algorithm 1: Exact VI for the Base Model (Base VI)
     Input: Initial values U 0 , number of iterations k.
     Output: Approximation to the optimal policy ν k .
 1 for k ′ = 1, 2, . . . , k do

 2      for s in the state space S do
               ′                         ′
            U k (s) = maxa r(s, a) + γ E U k −1 (f (s, a, w)) .
                                                             
 3

 4      end
 5 end

 6 for s in the state space S do

        ν k (s) = arg maxa r(s, a) + γ E U k (f (s, a, w)) .
                                                         
 7

 8 end




 Algorithm 2: Frozen-State Value Iteration (FSVI)
     Input: Initial values JT∗ ≡ 0 and V 0 , number of iterations k.
     Output: Approximation of the T -periodic frozen-state policy (µ̃k , π̃ ∗ ) and J1∗ .
 1 for each slow state x ∈ X do

 2      for t = T − 1, T − 2, . . . , 1 do
 3          for each fast state y ∈ Y do
                 Jt∗ (x, y) = maxa r(x, y, a) + γ E Jt+1  (x, fY (x, y, a, w)) .
                                                     ∗                        
 4

                 π̃t∗ (x, y) = arg maxa r(x, y, a) + γ E Jt+1 (x, fY (x, y, a, w)) .
                                                         ∗                       
 5

 6       end
 7    end
 8 end

 9 for k ′ = 1, 2, . . . , k do

10      for s0 = (x0 , y0 ) in the state space X × Y do
               ′
           V k (x0 , y0 , J1∗ , π̃ ∗ ) = maxa E R̃(s0 , a, J1∗ ) + γ T V i−1 (xT , yT , J1∗ , π̃ ∗ ) .
                                                                                                   
11

12    end
13 end

14 for s0 = (x0 , y0 ) in the state space X × Y do

        µ̃k (x0 , y0 ) = arg maxa E R̃(s0 , a, J1∗ ) + γ T V k (xT , yT , J1∗ , π̃ ∗ ) .
                                                                                     
15

16 end




                                                              17
   1. Problems with implicit hierarchical structure. Many real-world applications do not

      exhibit explicit hierarchy in their MDP formulations but nevertheless contain natural two-level

      behavioral structure. We illustrate this type of problem in Section 9 through our gridworld

      with spatial tasks domain: the agent first “accepts” a task (each task comes with a starting and

      ending location) to undertake and then executes a sequence of navigation actions to complete

      it. This problem was motivated by operations domains such as warehouse robotics (Yang

      et al., 2020) and on-demand spatial services from the driver’s perspective (Chung et al., 2018;

      Jiang et al., 2020; Ong et al., 2021; Ashkrof et al., 2024), where high-level task acceptance

      decisions are followed by fast-paced and relatively more myopic execution.

   2. Problems with natural cyclical behavior. In some domains, optimal or near-optimal

      behavior follows a cyclic structure. A classic example is inventory control, where the policy

      repeatedly builds up and depletes inventory. We show results on inventory control with fixed

      costs in Section 9. Related problems, such as energy or commodity trading (Kim and Powell,

      2011; Carmona and Ludkovski, 2010; Löhndorf and Minner, 2010; Jiang and Powell, 2015b)

      or inventory repositioning (He et al., 2020; Benjaafar et al., 2022), may also exhibit similar

      cyclical behavior. Another domain we consider in Section 9 is a dynamic pricing problem

      with reference effects, where cyclic pricing strategies have been shown to perform well under

      various assumptions (Wang, 2016; Chen et al., 2017). In all of the above settings, freezing the

      slow state over a short horizon can capture the cyclical dynamics of the optimal policy.


A key advantage of FSVI is that it can discover both forms of structure automatically through

its two-level decomposition. Therefore, the user of the algorithm need not encode any concrete

hierarchical or cyclical behavior and only needs to set the parameter T , which can often be selected

using domain expertise. In Section 7, we also show how our theoretical analyses may guide the

selection of T .




                                                 18
5.2       Computational Cost of FSVI

Let us now discuss the computational cost of FSVI. Here, we take a dynamic programming per-

spective,7 where the model is known and expectations can be computed. It is well known that each

iteration of standard VI, which provides a contraction factor of γ, has time complexity O |S|2 |A|
                                                                                                  

(Littman et al., 1995). The upper level of FSVI, on the other hand, enjoys an improved contraction

factor γ T with the same per-iteration running time of O |S|2 |A| , given that we pay a one-time
                                                                  

fixed cost of solving the lower level. The quantity O |S|2 |A| consists of a factor of |S||A| due to
                                                              

the number of state-action pairs at which to compute the Bellman update and another factor of |S|

due to the number of successor states. Since freezing slow states restricts the successor states to Y,

each iteration of the lower-level VI (first part of Algorithm 2) has running time O |X ||Y|2 |A| . An
                                                                                                

additional O |S|2 T is required to compute the T -step transition probabilities of following π̃ ∗ , to
                     

be used in the upper-level VI steps, resulting in a one-time fixed cost of O(|X ||Y|2 |A| T + |S|2 T ).

Particularly when |X | is large, this can be a reasonable fixed cost to pay in order to get the much im-

proved discount factor of γ T going forward. The equations below give a direct comparison between

the computational cost of VI vs FSVI:


                               CostVI (k) = O k |S|2 |A| ,                                 (VI after k iterations)
                                                        


                                                                 
            CostFSVI (k) = O |X | |Y|2 |A| T + |S|2 T + k |S|2 |A| .                    (FSVI after k iterations)
                              |          {z         }   | {z }
                                      one-time lower-level        upper-level
                                      pre–processing cost          iterations



6       Theoretical Analysis

In this section, we develop the theory to understand the regret of FSVI. First, in Section 6.1, we

derive the reward approximation error between the hierarchical reformulation and the frozen-state

approximation. This result becomes needed in later sections. In Section 6.2, we define the notion of

regret that we use in the paper. Then in Section 6.3, we give an important lemma that illustrates

the trade-offs between the various sources of error and how they contribute to the overall regret.

7
    In our numerical results of Section 9, we will take a different, more practical perspective, where we work with a
    generative model or simulator of the environment.



                                                             19
Finally in Section 6.4, we give the main result of the section, which characterizes the regret of FSVI

for a particular T and k.


6.1   Reward Approximation Error

Recall that (µ∗ , π ∗ ) is an optimal T -periodic policy of the base model’s hierarchical reformulation

(8). Suppose π ∗ is available. Then, the Bellman equation of the base model reformulation is


              U ∗ (x0 , y0 ) = Ū ∗ (x0 , y0 )

                             = max E R(x0 , y0 , a, π ∗ ) + γ T Ū ∗ (xT , yT )
                                                                                 
                                 a
                                                        T −1
                                          "                                                             #
                                                        X
                             = max E r(x0 , y0 , a) +        γ t r(xt , yt , πt∗ ) + γ T U ∗ (xT , yT )
                                 a
                                                           t=1
                                   h                                        i
                            = max E r(x0 , y0 , a) + γ H T −1 U ∗ (x1 , y1 ) ,                              (16)
                                                                 
                                 a



where the notation H k is shorthand for k applications of the operator H, i.e., H k U = H(H k−1 U )

and H 1 U = HU . Therefore, the expected T -horizon reward can be written as

                                      h                                                             i
            E R(x0 , y0 , a, π ∗ ) = E r(x0 , y0 , a) + γ H T −1 U ∗ (x1 , y1 ) − γ T U ∗ (xT , yT ) .      (17)
                                                                  



   Given the optimal value J1∗ of the lower level (10), the T -horizon reward of the upper level (14)

can be written as


                        E R̃(x0 , y0 , a, J1∗ ) = r(x0 , y0 , a) + γ E J1∗ (x1 , y1 )
                                                                                  


                                                 = r(x0 , y0 , a) + γ H̃ T −1 JT∗ (x1 , y1 ),
                                                                                 


                                                 = r(x0 , y0 , a) + γ H̃ T −1 0 (x1 , y1 ),                 (18)
                                                                                



where 0 is the all-zero value function. The difference between (17) and (18) can be interpreted

as follows: in the former, we follow a lower-level policy that is aware of a terminal value U ∗ (but

exclude that value when defining the T -horizon reward), while in the latter, we follow a lower-level

policy that sees zero terminal reward at the end of the T − 1 periods.

   The first step to understanding the performance of the frozen-state policy is to analyze the



                                                          20
reward approximation E[R̃(s0 , a, J1∗ )] compared to the true reward E[R(s0 , a, π ∗ )]. Proposition 6.1

shows how the difference between two reward functions is dependent on the number of frozen periods

T , along with the problem parameters.

Proposition 6.1 (Reward Approximation Error). Let ⟨S, A, W, f, r, γ⟩ be a (α, dY )-fast-slow MDP

satisfying Assumption 2. Let π ∗ be the optimal lower-level policy for the base model reformulation (8)

and J1∗ be the optimal (first-stage) value of the lower-level problem in the frozen-state approximation

(10). For any state s0 = (x0 , y0 ) and action a, the approximation error between the T -horizon reward

of hierarchical reformulation and the frozen-state approximation, i.e., the discrepancy between (17)

and (18), can be bounded as:


            E R(s0 , a, π ∗ ) − E R̃(s0 , a, J1∗ )
                                               

                           TX  −2    i−1                      T −2
                                                         "                                 #
                                           Ljf + γ T −1 LU αdY      Ljf + γdY (α + 2)(T − 1) ,
                                      X                        X
                 ≤ αdY Lr          γi                                                                (19)
                                 i=1      j=0                          j=0
                    |              {z            }    |                       {z             }
                               freeze error                           end-of-horizon error


Proof. The detailed proof is in Appendix E.2.

   For more convenient notation, we define ϵr (γ, α, dY , Lr , Lf , T ) to be the right-hand-side of (19):

                                  TX−2     i−1                    T −2
                                                             "                                #
                                                 j                       j
                                            X                      X
                                          i            T −1
      ϵr (γ, α, dY , L, T ) = αdY Lr    γ       Lf + γ      LU αdY      Lf + γdY (α + 2)(T − 1) ,
                                        i=1     j=0                          j=0


where L = (Lr , Lf , LU ) emphasizes the dependence on the various Lipschitz constants. In subse-

quent sections, we use ϵr as an ingredient in analyzing the regret of various frozen-state policies.


6.2     Defining Regret

We start with definitions of the regret of both stationary and T -periodic policies.

Definition 2 (Regret). Consider a fast-slow MDP with initial state s0 and optimal policy ν ∗ . The

regret of a stationary policy ν is defined as

                                         ∗
                        R(s0 , ν) = U ν (s0 ) − U ν (s0 )      and   R(ν) = max R(s0 , ν).
                                                                               s0




                                                          21
The regret of the T -periodic policy (µ, π) is defined as:

                        ∗
    R(s0 , µ, π) = U ν (s0 ) − Ū µ (s0 , π) = Ū ∗ (s0 ) − Ū µ (s0 , π)   and   R(µ, π) = max R(s0 , µ, π).
                                                                                                s0



The second equality in the definition of R(s0 , µ, π) uses the value equivalence between the base model

and its hierarchical reformulation (Proposition 3.1).

Remark 4. As a follow-up comment to Remark 2, notice that V ∗ (s0 , J1∗ , π̃ ∗ ) does not directly enter

the regret definition, as V ∗ (s0 , J1∗ , π̃ ∗ ) is just the optimal value of the frozen-state approximation,

not the value of its implied greedy policy µ̃∗ when evaluated in the base model. However, the regret

of course depends on V ∗ (s0 , J1∗ , π̃ ∗ ) indirectly, because µ̃∗ depends on V ∗ (s0 , J1∗ , π̃ ∗ ).


6.3    A General Lemma

In this section, we first prove a general lemma that will be used to analyze FSVI.

Lemma 6.1. Suppose we have an approximation (π, J1 ) to the lower-level solution (π ∗ , U ∗ ). Fur-

ther, suppose we have an approximation V to the upper-level solution V ∗ (J1 , π). Consider a T -

periodic policy (µ, π), where


                               µ(s0 ) = arg max E R̃(s0 , a, J1 ) + γ T V (sT (a, π)) .                          (20)
                                                                                    
                                           a∈A


Then, the regret of (µ, π) can be bounded as follows:

                               2γ T
                                               
                                            2
         R(µ, π) ≤                      +         ϵr (π ∗ , J1 )
                            (1 − γ T )2 1 − γ T
                                    2γ 2T      2γ T                             2γ T
                                                     
                            +               +           L  U d(α, d Y , T ) +        V ∗ (J1 , π) − V    ∞
                                                                                                             ,
                                 (1 − γ T )2 1 − γ T                          1 − γT

where ϵr (π ∗ , J1 ) = maxs,a |E[R(s, a, π ∗ )] − E[R̃(s, a, J1 )]| and d(α, dY , T ) = 2dY (α + 1)(T − 1).

Proof. See Appendix E.3.

    The result of Lemma 6.1 above can be interpreted as the regret being bounded by


   reward error (& end-of-horizon effect) + upper-level freeze error + V -approximation error,


                                                           22
which directly corresponds to the three terms in the bound. The reward error is due to freezing

the slow state in the lower level along with using zero terminal value; the upper-level freeze error

propagates the lower-level freeze error to the upper level’s infinite horizon; and the V -approximation

error is due to not solving the upper-level problem exactly.


6.4   Regret of FSVI

An instance of FSVI is associated with two primary quantities: k, the number of VI iterations,

and T , the number of periods the slow state is frozen in the frozen-state approximation. The next

theorem gives a bound on the regret of the policy obtained for a particular k and T .

Theorem 6.1. Let (µ̃k , π̃ ∗ ) be the resulting T -periodic policy after running FSVI for k iterations.

The regret incurred when running (µ̃k , π̃ ∗ ) in the base model satisfies

                                 2γ T
                                                    
                                                2
              R(µ̃k , π̃ ∗ ) ≤             +            ϵr (γ, α, dY , L, T )
                              (1 − γ T )2 1 − γ T
                                    2γ 2T         2γ T                          2rmax γ (k+1)T
                                                        
                             +           T  2
                                              +        T
                                                            LU d(α, dY , T ) +                   ,
                                 (1 − γ )       1−γ                            (1 − γ)(1 − γ T )

where the last term, which depends on k, accounts for the error due to value iteration.

Proof. See Appendix E.4.




                (a) Lf = 0.99 (small)                                     (b) Lf = 1.05 (large)

                 Figure 4: Reward approximation error comparison for two values of Lf .




                                                      23
7     Interpreting the Regret Analysis

It is common for theoretical analyses in reinforcement learning to depend on Lipschitz constants of

the underlying MDP (see, e.g., Pirotta et al. (2015), Asadi et al. (2018), Gelada et al. (2019), Sinclair

et al. (2022), or Maran et al. (2024)). Because these Lipschitz constants are typically conservative

approximations of the true MDP dynamics, our regret bounds may not always align closely with

the empirical regret observed in real-world settings. This is consistent with much of the literature

where bounds often serve more as qualitative guides than precise predictors.

    Regardless, such regret analysis is valuable, as it can help us understand and clarify the trade-

offs involved when selecting various parameters, primarily T , the horizon of the frozen lower-level

problem. This is particularly true in our setting, where we are balancing several sources of error

with computational improvements. In this section, we numerically compute the regret bounds for

various values of T in order to obtain insights.


7.1   Illustrating Reward Error

First, we examine the reward approximation error analyzed in Proposition 6.1. Depending on how

the “freeze error” and the “end-of-horizon error” interact, we see different behaviors of the overall

reward approximation error, as illustrated in Figure 4. For both examples, the end-of-horizon error

increases at first, but then decreases toward zero as T becomes large. In the example with Lf < 1

(left), the freeze error converges as T increases; however, if Lf > 1, the freeze error grows without

bound. This leads to two distinct patterns in the overall reward approximation error: (1) when

the freeze error is well-controlled, the total reward approximation error (blue) generally follows

the unimodal shape of the end-of-horizon error (green); and (2) when the freeze error (orange)

grows without bound, the reward approximation error (blue) follows a unimodal shape at first, but

eventually grows again.


7.2   Regret of Base VI

We pause here briefly to state Proposition 7.1, a well-known property that gives the regret of exact

VI on the base model. We use this result as a comparison in to the regret of FSVI in the next

section.

                                                   24
Figure 5: Regret versus computational cost for Base VI and FSVI as the number of value iteration steps
increases. In this example, we see three regimes depending on the computational budget: in the low budget
regime, the lowest regret algorithm is FSVI with T = 16; in the medium budget regime, FSVI with T = 9
achieves lowest regret; and in the high budget regime, not surprisingly, Base VI achieves lowest regret.


Proposition 7.1. Let ν k be the result of running Algorithm 1 on the base model (5). Then,

                                                             2rmax γ k+1
                                R(ν k ) = ∥U νk − U ∗ ∥∞ ≤               ,
                                                              (1 − γ)2

we recall that rmax is an upper bound on the reward.

Proof. See Appendix E.5.



7.3   Regret versus Computational Cost for FSVI and VI: Selecting T

Next, we show how Proposition 7.1 (the regret of Base VI) and Theorem 6.1 (the regret of FSVI)

can be combined to provide intuition about whether to use Base VI or FSVI (and if so, which T

and k?). We consider the trade-off between regret and computational cost, using the definition

of cost given in Section 5.2. For FSVI, the concrete problem facing a practitioner is as follows:

given a computational cost budget B, what combination of (T, k) should be used? We make two

observations: first, for a fixed T , regret decreases with k (see Theorem 6.1), and second, for a

                                                   25
fixed T , cost increases with k (see Section 5.2). Therefore, for a fixed T , one should run FSVI for

kmax (T, B) iterations, where kmax (T, B) is the largest k such that the computational cost of running

FSVI with T is less than B. It thus follows that to select T , one should simply examine the regret

for different values of T at k = kmax (T, B) and select the value of T with the lowest regret.

    The above procedure can be converted into a simple visualization. In Figure 5, we plot regret

versus computational cost. This is done for both FSVI for different values of T and also for standard

value iteration (Base VI). Each colored curve traces the regret-cost trade-off generated by varying k

for a distinct T (though k is not shown). Imposing the computational budget corresponds to drawing

the vertical line x = B and where this line intersects a curve, one can read off the best attainable

regret given budget B for the algorithm represented by that curve. By scanning the intersection

points and selecting the one with the lowest regret, one can identify the best algorithm to use,

whether it is FSVI with a particular T or simply Base VI. Hence, the plot allows us to visually solve

the constrained optimization problem of minimizing regret under a given computational budget.

This exercise leads us to interesting takeaways illustrated in Figure 5:

    1. If the available computational budget is low, one should use FSVI with a large value of T (in

      this case, T = 16). Despite introducing more error due to freezing, this allows us to get the

      quickest decrease in regret initially due to the lower discount factor, but as we can see from

      the plot, the decrease does not sustain as we increase computation.

    2. If the computational budget is high, one should simply use Base VI, as it will eventually

      achieve zero regret. This is natural and intuitive because FSVI introduces unavoidable error

      that does not vanish as the number of value iteration steps increases.

    3. With a medium computational budget, FSVI with a moderate value of T = 9 leads to the

      best regret guarantee. This regime is where we expect many real-world problems to fall.



8     Frozen-State Fitted Value Iteration under a Generative Model

So far, we have operated in the dynamic programming setting, where the model (rewards and

transitions) is assumed to be known. We now move on to a more practical and realistic setting

where we assume access to a generative model or simulator of the environment (also referred to as

                                                 26
 Algorithm 3: Fitted Value Iteration (FVI) (Munos and Szepesvári, 2008)
     Input: State distribution ρ, number of iterations k, number of state samples N , number of
            next-state samples M , and a regression procedure Regress.
     Output: Approximate value function U k , and policy ν k .
 1 Initialize U 0 arbitrarily.
 2 for k ′ = 1, 2, . . . , k do

 3      Sample a dataset D = {s(i) }N
                                    i=1 ∼ ρ

 4      for s(i) ∈ D do
                                          M
                                        1 X k′ −1 (i,a,j) 
 5
               (i)
               u               (i)
                     = max r(s , a) + γ     U     s         , where s(i,a,j) is sampled from the
                        a               M
                                              j=1
               generative model, conditional on state s(i) and action a.
 6      end
           ′
 7      U k = Regress({(s(i) , u(i) )}N
                                      i=1 )

 8 end

 9 for s ∈ S do

                                           M
                                         1 X k (a,j) 
10      ν k (s) = arg max r(s, a) + γ        U s       , where s(a,j) is sampled from the
                         a               M
                                            j=1
         generative model, conditional on state s and action a.
11 end




a restart distribution), an assumption frequently used in the RL literature (Kakade and Langford,

2002; Kearns et al., 2002; Munos and Szepesvári, 2008; Li et al., 2020; Agarwal et al., 2020). This

setting is widely studied and captures many real-world use cases where it is possible to simulate

environment transitions (Bellemare et al., 2012; Todorov et al., 2012; Brockman et al., 2016; Tassa

et al., 2018), without having full access to closed-form model dynamics. This is an important setting

that occupies a middle ground between dynamic programming and traditional model-free RL.

     Fitted value iteration (FVI) is a simple method that approximates the value iteration backup

step using regression (Munos and Szepesvári, 2008), which we keep as an abstract subroutine using

the notation Regress {(s(i) , y (i) )}N
                                      i=1 , which refers to the problem of regressing {y } onto {s }.
                                                                                        (i)       (i)
                                         

The Regress procedure is meant to encode all of the information needed to perform the regression:

basis functions, approximation architecture (e.g., linear model or neural network), optimization

procedure (e.g., stochastic gradient descent), etc. In Algorithm 3, we show the abstract version of



                                                      27
 Algorithm 4: Frozen-State Fitted Value Iteration (FSFVI)
     Input: State distribution ρ, number of iterations k, number of state samples N , number of
            next-state samples Ml (lower level), Mu (upper level), and a regression procedure
            Regress.
   Output: Approximation of the T -periodic frozen-state policy (µ̃k , π̃ ∗ ) and J˜1 .
 1 Initialize J˜T ≡ 0.

 2 for t = T − 1, T − 2, . . . , 1 do

 3      Sample a dataset D = {(x(i) , y (i) )}N
                                              i=1 ∼ ρ

 4      for each (x(i) , y (i) ) ∈ D do
                                                           M
                     (i)                                1 Xl ˜
                           = max r x(i) , y (i) , a + γ      Jt+1 x(i) , y (i,a,j) where y (i,a,j) is sampled from
                                                                                 
 5               Jt
                             a∈A                        Ml
                                                                    j=1
                  the generative model, conditional on state (x(i) , y (i) ) and action a.
 6      end
                                                                  
                                                        (i)  N
 7      J˜t = Regress                 (x(i) , y (i) ), Jt     i=1
 8 end

                                                                                    M
                                                                                    Xl
                                          ∗                           1
 9 Let π̃ ∗ = (π1∗ , . . . πT
                            ∗
                              −1 ), with πt (s) = arg max r(s, a) + γ                     J˜t+1 s(a,j) , where s(a,j) is
                                                                                                      
                                                      a               Ml
                                                                                    j=1
      sampled from the generative model, conditional on state s and action a.
10 Initialize V̂ 0 arbitrarily.

11 for k ′ = 1, 2, . . . , k do

12      Sample a dataset D = {(x(i) , y (i) )}N
                                              i=1 ∼ ρ

13      for each (x(i) , y (i) ) ∈ D do
                                      u h  M
                     (k′ )         1 X                       ′
                                                                                    i
                                                                                             (i,a,j)    (i,a,j)
14               V           = max        R̃(i,a,j) + γ T V k −1 x(i,a,j) , y (i,a,j) where xT       , yT       , and
                               a∈A Mu
                                           j=1
                  R̃(i,a,j) are sampled using a T -step transition conditioned on x(i) , a, π̃ ∗ and J˜1 .
15      end
             ′
                                                                N 
16      Ṽ k = Regress                  (x(i) , y (i) ), V (i)    i=1
17 end

18 for s0 = (x0 , y0 ) ∈ S do

                                   u h            M
                                1 X                        
                                                             (i,a,j) (i,a,j)
                                                                             i
                                                                                       (i,a,j)    (i,a,j)
19
         k
        µ̃ (x0 , y0 ) = arg max        R̃(i,a,j) + γ T Ṽ k xT      , yT        where xT       , yT       ,
                          a∈A   Mu
                                                  j=1
         and R̃(i,a,j) are sampled from a T -step transition as above.
20 end




                                                                          28
FVI and in Algorithm 4, we give the frozen-state extension, Frozen-state FVI (FSFVI), which can

be viewed as a practical extension of FSVI for the RL setting.

    Additionally, in Appendix C, we present an alternative version of FVI that is less practical, but

more amenable to theoretical analysis, leading to a regret bound that we provide in Theorem C.1.

These results are motivated by the approximate value iteration method first presented in Tsitsiklis

and Van Roy (1996). Given that both the method and analysis are technical and notation-heavy,

we relegated the discussion to the Appendix.



9    Numerical Experiments

For our numerical experiments, we operate in the simulator-based RL setting described above,

where a generative model or simulator is available but the MDP is not explicitly known. Note

that both FVI and FSFVI naturally apply in this setting, as expectations are approximated via

sample averages using either M , Ml , or Mu next-state samples. In addition, we introduce empirical

counterparts to Base VI (Algorithm 1) and FSVI (Algorithm 7), which we refer to as Base Empirical-

VI (Base E-VI) and Empirical-FSVI (E-FSVI), following the naming convention of Haskell et al.

(2016). These algorithms are identical to their exact counterparts, except that all expectations are

replaced with sample averages. For completeness, we provide full specifications in Appendix A.

    In Section 5.2, we analyzed the computational cost of FSVI under the assumption of a known

model with exact expectation computations. In the RL setting, however, this definition requires

adjustment. As a natural analogue, we use the number of value function evaluations as a proxy for

computational effort. This makes sense in the RL context because value-based methods, whether

value iteration, Q-iteration, or their fitted variants, all rely on repeatedly evaluating a value function

(or Q-function). These evaluations typically dominate the overall computation time, especially

when using function approximation. Thus, counting value function evaluations provides a measure

of computational cost that aligns closely with RL practice, while being closely related to the exact

results from Section 5.2.

    We compare to a range of algorithms. For purely tabular methods, we consider:

    • E-FSVI with T ∈ {3, 6, 12}: Empirical-FSVI, as described in Algorithm 6. For each domain,

      we run E-FSVI for each T value in order to illustrate the trade-offs.

                                                   29
       • Base E-VI: Empirical-VI, as described in Algorithm 5, applied to the “base”, non-hierarchical

         problem. We also use Base E-VI to compute an approximation of the optimal value.

       • Base E-QI: Empirical Q-iteration is the analogue of E-VI using a Q-function representation.

       • Slow-Agn Base E-VI: Slow-agnostic Base E-VI, a simple baseline that pretends the slow state

         does not exist and assumes the value function only depends on the fast state.8

With function approximation, we test:

       • {Lin, Deep}-FSFVI: Our proposed frozen-state fitted value iteration, as introduced in Algo-

         rithm 4, using either linear function approximator (Lin-FSFVI) or a three-layer neural network

         function approximator (Deep-FSVI).

       • {Lin, Deep}-FVI: Fitted value iteration (Munos and Szepesvári, 2008) using either linear func-

         tion approximator (Lin-FVI) or a three-layer neural network function approximator (Deep-

         FVI). This algorithm is also known as least-squares Monte Carlo, popularized by Longstaff

         and Schwartz (2001) and frequently used in the operations literature (see, e.g., Nadarajah

         et al. (2017)).

       • {Lin, Deep}-FQI: Fitted Q-iteration (Ernst et al., 2005) using either linear function approxi-

         mator (Lin-FQI) or a three-layer neural network function approximator (Deep-FQI).

For Lin-FSFVI and Lin-FVI, we use the raw state feature vectors as input to a linear function

approximator, without applying any feature transformation or basis functions. For Deep-FSFVI,

FVI, we input the raw state vector into a fully connected feedforward neural network with two

hidden layers, each comprising 4 units and ReLU activations, followed by a final linear output layer.

For Lin-FQI and Deep-FQI, the input is formed by concatenating the raw state vector with a one-

hot encoding of the discrete action (a standard practice in RL for handling discrete action spaces).

The architecture of the Deep-FQI network is otherwise identical to that of Deep-FVI. All models

are trained using the mean squared error loss and optimized with the Adam optimizer (Kingma,

2014). A detailed open-source implementation is also provided with this paper.

8
    To implement this method, we convert the “full” state to a “partial” state by deleting the slow state, and when
    needing to interact with the simulator, we convert from a “partial” state back to a “full” state by injecting a random
    value for the slow state. See Appendix B.1 for further details.


                                                             30
    We test these algorithms across three domains, summarized in Table 2. Each domain uses a

high discount factor of γ = 0.995, corresponding to an effective planning horizon of approximately

1/(1 − γ) = 200 steps. We describe each experiment below; in each section, we use self-contained

notation. Detailed experimental settings are given in Appendix B.

                                   Table 2: Summary of Experimental Domains


 Domain                      |S|      |A|   |S × A|                                       Algorithms Tested

 Inventory control            561      11     6,171   Base E-VI, E-FSVI, Base E-QI, Slow-Agn Base E-VI

 Spatial-task gridworld     4,356      32   139,392   Base E-VI, E-FSVI, Base E-QI, Slow-Agn Base E-VI
                                                                            Lin-FSFVI, Lin-FVI, Lin-FQI,
 Dynamic pricing           15,150      21   318,150
                                                                        Deep-FSFVI, Deep-FVI, Deep-FQI




9.1    Inventory Control with Fixed Order Costs

We consider an infinite horizon inventory control problem (Porteus, 1990) with fixed order costs,

lost sales, and limited storage (Zhao et al., 2007). The state of the system is st = (yt , dt ), where

yt ∈ {0, 1, . . . , ymax } (the fast state) is the inventory level and dt ∈ D is the current demand (the

slow state), which evolves exogenously over time. At the beginning of each period t, the decision

maker observes the current state st and chooses an order quantity at ∈ Aorder = {0, a1 , . . . , amax }.

The cost incurred includes a fixed cost K if at > 0, a per-unit ordering cost c, and a holding cost h

per unit of end-of-period inventory. Unsatisfied demand is lost. The transition equation is:


                     yt+1 = min {yt + at − min{yt , dt+1 }, ymax } ,    dt+1 ∼ Pd (· | dt ),


where dt+1 is drawn from a distribution Pd conditional on dt . The (expected) reward in each period

is given by:
                                                             
                            r(st , at ) = p E min{yt , dt+1 } − c at − K 1{at > 0} ,

which represents the revenue, variable order cost, and fixed order cost. The objective is to maximize

infinite horizon discounted reward, with γ = 0.995. In our experiment, we set ymax = 50, Aorder =

{0, 5, . . . , 50}, dt+1 = clip[0,50] (dt + ϵt+1 ), and {ϵt } are i.i.d. random variables that take value 0 with



                                                       31
probability 0.8 and ±1 with probability 0.1 each.9 We use M = Mu = 50 for all methods, and

Ml = 1 for E-FSVI because the lower-level problem is deterministic.




Figure 6: Mean return (with 95% CI) versus computational cost for the inventory problem across five
independent replications. For E-FSVI, we plot the performance of the policy after each lower-level value
iteration and 3 times per upper-level value iteration. For the other methods, we plot 3 times per value
iteration. To compute the optimal value, we ran Base E-VI for 50 iterations with M = 100 samples per
backup.


       The results, shown in Figure 6, demonstrate that frozen-state methods substantially outperform

standard approaches in terms of computational efficiency. Specifically, E-FSVI with moderate values

of T , such as T = 6 and T = 12, achieves near-optimal return with significantly fewer value

function evaluations compared to Base E-VI and E-QI. This supports the intuition that freezing the

slow-moving demand state dt over short planning horizons can preserve essential structure while

simplifying the lower-level planning problem.

       Among the E-FSVI variants, we find that T = 6 offers the best overall performance when

considering both reward and computational cost. Larger values of T , such as T = 12, initially

converge faster but eventually suffer from increased approximation error due to longer freezing

horizons. Conversely, if we look at the earlier part of the curves, E-FSVI with T = 3 seems to

benefit less from the improved discount factor.

       While Base E-VI and E-QI eventually reach optimal performance, they require significantly more

computation. In contrast, the slow-agnostic baseline performs poorly, confirming that ignoring the

9
    We define clip[a,b] (x) = max{min{x, b}, a}.


                                                   32
slow state leads to suboptimal policies. These findings reinforce both our theoretical claims from

Section 6 and the trade-offs we observed in Figure 5 from Section 7.


9.2    Gridworld with Spatial Tasks


                              10
                               9                             Task 5           Task 2

                               8
                               7       Task 1
                               6                    Task 7
                               5
                               4                                          Task 8

                               3                                                           Task 3

                               2
                               1                    Task 4       Task 6

                               0
                                   0     1      2     3      4        5   6     7      8     9      10

Figure 7: Spatial tasks on an 11×11 gridworld. Start and end locations of each task are represented by the
arrows. In order to receive a reward, the agent must pick up an object from the start location of the task
and move it to the end location.


    The main idea behind our second experiment domain is illustrated in Figure 7 and is straightfor-

ward: an RL agent must navigate the gridworld and complete tasks. There are unlimited “quantities”

of each task, which are labeled using arrows in the figure. The agent first must “accept” a task, after

which they begin “working” on that task. To earn the “completion” reward, the agent must pick

up an object from the start location of the task (beginning of the arrow) and bring it to the end

location of the task. The agent also earns a small reward for picking up the object. The state of

the agent is st = (xt , yt , it , ot , wt ), where (xt , yt ) are the coordinates of the agent, it ∈ {0, 1, . . . , 8}

is the identity of the agent’s current task (where it = 0 means no current accepted task), ot ∈ {0, 1}

is a binary state indicating whether the agent has picked up the object associated with the current

task, and finally, wt ∈ {0, 1} is a reward signal indicating whether the high rewards are in the outer

ring (wt = 0) or the inner ring (wt = 1). The agent’s action is at = (i′t , dt ), where i′t ∈ {1, 2, . . . , 8}

is the identity of the task that the agent wishes to accept and dt is a cardinal direction to move.


                                                                 33
The rest of the environment works as follows:

   • If it = 0 (no current task), then it = i′t . Otherwise, i′t takes no effect.

   • If the agent reaches the start location of the current task it , then ot transitions from 0 to 1.

   • If the agent reaches the end location of the current task it and it = 1, then the agent receives

      a reward r(it , wt ).

The agent wishes to maximize infinite horizon discounted reward, with γ = 0.995. Again, we use

M = Mu = 50 for all methods, and Ml = 1 for E-FSVI. We omit a detailed formulation of the

MDP for succinctness, but give the full reward specification in Appendix B.2.




Figure 8: Mean return (with 95% CI) versus computational cost for the spatial gridworld problem across
five independent replications. For E-FSVI, we plot the performance of the policy after each lower-level value
iteration and 2 times per upper-level value iteration. For the other methods, we plot 2 times per value iter-
ation. To compute the optimal value, we ran Base E-VI for 50 iterations with M = 100 samples per backup.


   The results are shown in Figure 8. In contrast to the inventory control problem, the performance

differences between E-FSVI algorithms with different values of T are far more pronounced in this

domain: the smallest T value of T = 3 improves gradually and consistently, but is never quite

able to achieve good performance. This effect is likely due to the nature of the tasks and the

need to coordinate navigation across multiple steps. When T is too small, the frozen lower-level

policy is unable to fully capture meaningful navigation plans, leading to suboptimal behavior at the

upper level. Interestingly, we observe that an intermediate value such as T = 6 provides a strong


                                                     34
compromise: it allows the lower-level policy to encode useful subtask behavior while retaining

enough flexibility for the upper level to guide high-level decisions. We also notice that Base VI and

QI slowly improve and eventually reach optimality, but requires nearly 3x the computation to reach

75% optimality that E-FSVI with T = 6 is able to achieve very quickly.

   This experiment underscores that in environments with complex dynamics, the choice of T can

be quite consequential.


9.3    Dynamic Pricing with Reference Effects and Stochastic Consumer Behavior

We consider a dynamic pricing problem where a seller interacts with a market of consumers who

exhibit reference effects: that is, their purchase behavior depends not only on the current price but

also on a history of past prices. Reference prices represent consumers’ internal price expectations

for the product, based on historical prices. When the firm sets prices below (above) the consumer’s

reference price, there is a positive (negative) impact on demand. This is motivated by real-world

e-commerce and retail environments where consumers are sensitive to perceived fairness or price

changes over time. The model we consider is a slight extension of the one in Chen et al. (2017).
                                          + −
   The state variable is st = (pref
                                t , αt , ηt , ηt ), where pt is the reference price, αt is the market’s
                                                           ref


memory factor, and (ηt+ , ηt− ) are the marginal reference price effect for gains and losses. The

action is the price in the current period pt ∈ Pt , which induces a change in the reference price

 t+1 = αt pt + (1 − αt ) pt . We model the demand as
pref       ref



                                              +                     −
                Dt (pt , pref                        ref                   ref
                          t ) = bt − at pt + ηt max{pt − pt , 0} + ηt min{pt − pt , 0}.



Consumer behavior is jointly described by (αt , ηt+ , ηt− ), which evolve exogenously according to:


                                     −
                              +
                     (αt+1 , ηt+1 , ηt+1 ) = clip[(0.4,3,8),(0.9,7,12)] ((αt , ηt+ , ηt− ) + ϵt+1 ),


where clip is applied componentwise and ϵt+1 ∈ R3 and each component is i.i.d., taking value 0 with

0.9 probability, ±0.1 with 0.05 probability each for the αt dimension, and ±1 with 0.05 probability

each for the ηt+ , ηt− dimensions. The reward function is r(st , pt ) = pt Dt (pt , pref
                                                                                     t ).

   This problem is discretized as follows. The possible values of the action pt are {0, 0.5, 1.0, . . . , 10.0},



                                                          35
                                                                                                + −
and the possible values of the reference price are pref
                                                    t is {0, 0.1, 0.2, . . . , 10.0}. For αt , ηt , ηt , the

possible values are {0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7}, {3, 4, 5, 6, 7}, and {8, 9, 10, 11, 12}.




Figure 9: Mean return (with 95% CI) versus computational cost for the dynamic pricing problem using
linear architectures across five independent replications. For E-FSVI, we plot the performance of the policy
after each lower-level value iteration and once per upper-level value iteration. For the other methods, we
plot once per value iteration.




Figure 10: Mean return (with 95% CI) versus computational cost for the dynamic pricing problem using
linear network architectures across five independent replications. For E-FSVI, we plot the performance of the
policy after each lower-level value iteration and once per upper-level value iteration. For the other methods,
we plot once per value iteration.


    As shown in Table 2, this is the largest problem out of the three. We therefore use this domain

to test the “fitted” variants of our algorithms. We set N , the number of state samples, to be 10% of


                                                      36
the size of the state space. As before, we use M = Mu = 50 for all methods, and Ml = 1 for E-FSVI.

     Figures 9 and 10 compare the performance of frozen-state and baseline methods under two

different architectures: linear function approximation (Figure 9) and neural network function ap-

proximation (Figure 10). We point out several takeaways:


   1. Frozen-state methods improve upon baselines in both settings, but the gains are larger in

      the setting using neural network function approximation. This is largely due to the relatively

      poor performance of Deep-FVI and Deep-FQI, which appear to suffer from higher variance and

      instability during training. We hypothesize that this is due to the difficulty of fitting high-

      capacity models under long-horizon dynamics, where bootstrapping can amplify noise. In

      contrast, the structured nature of Deep-FSFVI, specifically the reduced effective discount fac-

      tor and frozen slow states, likely contributes to improved stability and more reliable learning.

   2. Again, we see that the T = 3 version of Deep-FSFVI performed poorly under both architec-

      tures, but T = 6 and T = 12 were adequate.


Overall, the results suggest that frozen-state methods are broadly effective, and surprisingly, seem

to enjoy some additional robustness even in the face of neural network architectures that can be

difficult to fit.



10      Conclusion

In this paper, we studied a new class of MDPs with a type of structure called fast-slow structure,

motivated by practical applications where some components of the state evolve slowly over time.

Based on this structure, we propose a set of new algorithms based on the idea of freezing the slow

state for several periods at a time to ease the computational burden of value iteration algorithms.

We analyze the regret of the resulting policy using a novel analysis of various Bellman operators.

Empirically, on three example applications, we show that our new frozen-state methods converge

significantly faster to good policies than standard methods, and notably, ignoring the slow state

leads to low-performing policies. Therefore, our method can be viewed as a viable compromise

between solving the full MDP (often computationally intractable) and completely ignoring states



                                                 37
during the modeling process (computationally easy but potentially highly suboptimal in the true

model).



Funding

This research is based upon work supported by the U.S. National Science Foundation under Grant

No. 1807536.




                                              38
References

A. Agarwal, S. Kakade, and L. F. Yang. Model-based reinforcement learning with a generative model is
  minimax optimal. In Conference on Learning Theory, pages 67–83. PMLR, 2020.

K. Asadi, D. Misra, and M. Littman. Lipschitz continuity in model-based reinforcement learning. In Inter-
  national Conference on Machine Learning, pages 264–273. PMLR, 2018.

P. Ashkrof, G. Homem de Almeida Correia, O. Cats, and B. Van Arem. On the relocation behavior of
  ride-sourcing drivers. Transportation Letters, 16(4):330–337, 2024.

A. G. Barto and S. Mahadevan. Recent advances in hierarchical reinforcement learning. Discrete Event
  Dynamic Systems, 13(1-2):41–77, 2003.

M. Bellemare, J. Veness, and M. Bowling. Investigating contingency awareness using atari 2600 games. In
  Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on artificial intelligence, volume 26, pages 864–871, 2012.

S. Benjaafar, D. Jiang, X. Li, and X. Li. Dynamic inventory repositioning in on-demand rental networks.
  Management Science, 68(11):7861–7878, 2022.

D. Bertsekas. Dynamic programming and optimal control: Volume I. Athena Scientific, 2012.

D. P. Bertsekas and S. Shreve. Stochastic optimal control: the discrete-time case. 2004.

D. P. Bertsekas and J. N. Tsitsiklis. Neuro-dynamic programming. Athena Scientific, 1996.

S. Bhatnagar and J. R. Panigrahi. Actor-critic algorithms for hierarchical Markov decision processes. Auto-
  matica, 42(4):637–644, 2006.

G. Brockman, V. Cheung, L. Pettersson, J. Schneider, J. Schulman, J. Tang, and W. Zaremba. Openai gym.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01540, 2016.

D. B. Brown and J. E. Smith. Unit commitment without commitment: A dynamic programming approach
  for managing an integrated energy system under uncertainty. Operations Research, 2025.

R. Carmona and M. Ludkovski. Valuation of energy storage: An optimal switching approach. Quantitative
  finance, 10(4):359–374, 2010.

H. S. Chang, P. J. Fard, S. I. Marcus, and M. Shayman. Multitime scale markov decision processes. IEEE
  Transactions on Automatic Control, 48(6):976–987, 2003.



                                                    39
X. Chen, P. Hu, and Z. Hu. Efficient algorithms for the dynamic pricing problem with reference price effect.
  Management Science, 63(12):4389–4408, 2017.

H. Chung, D. Freund, and D. B. Shmoys. Bike angels: An analysis of citi bike’s incentive program. In
  Proceedings of the 1st ACM SIGCAS Conference on Computing and Sustainable Societies, pages 1–9,
  2018.

K. Ciosek and D. Silver. Value iteration with options and state aggregation. Planning and Learning (PAL-
  15), page 1, 2015.

T. G. Dietterich. Hierarchical reinforcement learning with the MAXQ value function decomposition. Journal
  of Artificial Intelligence Research, 13:227–303, 2000.

B. L. Digney. Learning hierarchical control structures for multiple tasks and changing environments. In
  Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Simulation of Adaptive Behavior on From Animals to
  Animats 5, pages 321–330, 1998.

O. D. Domingues, P. Ménard, M. Pirotta, E. Kaufmann, and M. Valko. Kernel-based reinforcement learning:
  A finite-time analysis. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 2783–2792. PMLR, 2021.

I. El Shar and D. Jiang. Weakly coupled deep q-networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 36:43931–43950, 2023.

D. Ernst, P. Geurts, and L. Wehenkel. Tree-based batch mode reinforcement learning. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 6, 2005.

C. Gelada, S. Kumar, J. Buckman, O. Nachum, and M. G. Bellemare. Deepmdp: Learning continuous
  latent space models for representation learning. In International conference on machine learning, pages
  2170–2179. PMLR, 2019.

W. B. Haskell, R. Jain, and D. Kalathil. Empirical dynamic programming. Mathematics of Operations
  Research, 41(2):402–429, 2016.

L. He, Z. Hu, and M. Zhang. Robust repositioning for vehicle sharing. Manufacturing & Service Operations
  Management, 22(2):241–256, 2020.

M. Jacobson, N. Shimkin, and A. Shwartz. Piecewise stationary Markov decision processes, I: Constant gain.
  1999.

D. R. Jiang and W. B. Powell. An approximate dynamic programming algorithm for monotone value
  functions. Operations Research, 63(6):1489–1511, 2015a.


                                                     40
D. R. Jiang and W. B. Powell. Optimal hour-ahead bidding in the real-time electricity market with battery
  storage using approximate dynamic programming. INFORMS Journal on Computing, 27(3):525–543,
  2015b.

D. R. Jiang, L. Al-Kanj, and W. B. Powell. Optimistic monte carlo tree search with sampled information
  relaxation dual bounds. Operations Research, 68(6):1678–1697, 2020.

N. Jiang, A. Kulesza, S. Singh, and R. Lewis. The dependence of effective planning horizon on model accuracy.
  In Proceedings of the 2015 international conference on autonomous agents and multiagent systems, pages
  1181–1189, 2015.

A. Jonsson and A. G. Barto. A causal approach to hierarchical decomposition of factored MDPs. In
  Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 401–408, 2005.

S. Kakade and J. Langford. Approximately optimal approximate reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of
  the nineteenth international conference on machine learning, pages 267–274, 2002.

M. Kearns, Y. Mansour, and A. Y. Ng. A sparse sampling algorithm for near-optimal planning in large
  markov decision processes. Machine learning, 49:193–208, 2002.

J. A. Killian, A. Biswas, S. Shah, and M. Tambe. Q-learning Lagrange policies for multi-action restless
  bandits. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining,
  pages 871–881, 2021.

J. H. Kim and W. B. Powell. Optimal energy commitments with storage and intermittent supply. Operations
  research, 59(6):1347–1360, 2011.

D. P. Kingma. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.

S. Kunnumkal and H. Topaloglu. Using stochastic approximation methods to compute optimal base-stock
  levels in inventory control problems. Operations Research, 56(3):646–664, 2008.

G. Li, Y. Wei, Y. Chi, Y. Gu, and Y. Chen. Breaking the sample size barrier in model-based reinforcement
  learning with a generative model. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:12861–12872,
  2020.

M. L. Littman, T. L. Dean, and L. P. Kaelbling. On the complexity of solving markov decision problems.
  In Proceedings of the 11th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pages 394–402, 1995.

N. Löhndorf and S. Minner. Optimal day-ahead trading and storage of renewable energies—an approximate
  dynamic programming approach. Energy Systems, 1:61–77, 2010.


                                                     41
F. A. Longstaff and E. S. Schwartz. Valuing american options by simulation: a simple least-squares approach.
  The review of financial studies, 14(1):113–147, 2001.

S. Mannor, I. Menache, A. Hoze, and U. Klein. Dynamic abstraction in reinforcement learning via clustering.
  In Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Machine Learning, page 71, 2004.

D. Maran, A. M. Metelli, M. Papini, and M. Restell. No-regret reinforcement learning in smooth mdps.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03792, 2024.

A. McGovern and A. G. Barto. Automatic discovery of subgoals in reinforcement learning using diverse
  density. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 361–368, 2001.

I. Menache, S. Mannor, and N. Shimkin. Q-cut-dynamic discovery of sub-goals in reinforcement learning. In
  Proceedings of the 13th European Conference on Machine Learning, pages 295–306, 2002.

R. Munos and C. Szepesvári. Finite-time bounds for fitted value iteration. Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 9(May):815–857, 2008.

S. Nadarajah and A. A. Cire. Self-adapting network relaxations for weakly coupled markov decision processes.
  Management Science, 71(2):1779–1802, 2025.

S. Nadarajah, F. Margot, and N. Secomandi. Comparison of least squares monte carlo methods with appli-
  cations to energy real options. European Journal of Operational Research, 256(1):196–204, 2017.

J. M. Nascimento and W. B. Powell. An optimal approximate dynamic programming algorithm for the
  lagged asset acquisition problem. Mathematics of Operations Research, 34(1):210–237, 2009.

J. Ok, A. Proutiere, and D. Tranos. Exploration in structured reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.

H. Y. Ong, D. Freund, and D. Crapis. Driver positioning and incentive budgeting with an escrow mechanism
  for ride-sharing platforms. INFORMS Journal on Applied Analytics, 51(5):373–390, 2021.

I. Osband and B. Van Roy. Near-optimal reinforcement learning in factored MDPs. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 27, 2014.

J. R. Panigrahi and S. Bhatnagar. Hierarchical decision making in semiconductor fabs using multi-time scale
  Markov decision processes. In 2004 43rd IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, volume 4, pages
  4387–4392. IEEE, 2004.




                                                    42
K. P. Papadaki and W. B. Powell. Exploiting structure in adaptive dynamic programming algorithms for a
  stochastic batch service problem. European Journal of Operational Research, 142(1):108–127, 2002.

R. E. Parr and S. Russell. Hierarchical control and learning for Markov decision processes. University of
  California, Berkeley Berkeley, CA, 1998.

M. V. Pereira and L. M. Pinto. Multi-stage stochastic optimization applied to energy planning. Mathematical
  programming, 52:359–375, 1991.

A. B. Philpott and Z. Guan. On the convergence of stochastic dual dynamic programming and related
  methods. Operations Research Letters, 36(4):450–455, 2008.

M. Pirotta, M. Restelli, and L. Bascetta. Policy gradient in Lipschitz Markov decision processes. Machine
  Learning, 100(2-3):255–283, 2015.

E. L. Porteus. Stochastic inventory theory. Handbooks in operations research and management science, 2:
  605–652, 1990.

D. Precup. Temporal abstraction in reinforcement learning. Ph.D. thesis, University of Massachusetts, 2000.

M. L. Puterman. Markov decision processes: Discrete stochastic dynamic programming. John Wiley & Sons,
  2014.

Ö. Şimşek and A. G. Barto. Using relative novelty to identify useful temporal abstractions in reinforcement
  learning. In Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Machine Learning, page 95, 2004.

Ö. Şimşek, A. P. Wolfe, and A. G. Barto. Identifying useful subgoals in reinforcement learning by local graph
  partitioning. In Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Machine learning, pages 816–823,
  2005.

S. Sinclair, T. Wang, G. Jain, S. Banerjee, and C. Yu. Adaptive discretization for model-based reinforcement
  learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3858–3871, 2020.

S. R. Sinclair, S. Banerjee, and C. L. Yu. Adaptive discretization in online reinforcement learning. Operations
  Research, 2022.

S. P. Singh and R. C. Yee. An upper bound on the loss from approximate optimal-value functions. Machine
  Learning, 16(3):227–233, 1994.

R. Song and K. Xu. Temporal concatenation for Markov decision processes. Probability in the Engineering
  and Informational Sciences, pages 1–28, 2020.


                                                      43
M. Stolle and D. Precup. Learning options in reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 5th International
  Symposium on Abstraction, Reformulation and Approximation, pages 212–223, 2002.

R. S. Sutton, D. Precup, and S. Singh. Between mdps and semi-MDPs: A framework for temporal abstraction
  in reinforcement learning. Artificial Intelligence, 112(1-2):181–211, 1999.

Y. Tassa, Y. Doron, A. Muldal, T. Erez, Y. Li, D. d. L. Casas, D. Budden, A. Abdolmaleki, J. Merel,
  A. Lefrancq, et al. Deepmind control suite. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.00690, 2018.

E. Todorov, T. Erez, and Y. Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control. In 2012 IEEE/RSJ
  international conference on intelligent robots and systems, pages 5026–5033. IEEE, 2012.

J. N. Tsitsiklis and B. Van Roy. Feature-based methods for large scale dynamic programming. Machine
  Learning, 22(1-3):59–94, 1996.

S. Wang, S. Bi, and Y.-J. A. Zhang. Demand response management for profit maximizing energy loads in
  real-time electricity market. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, 33(6):6387–6396, 2018.

Y. Wang, M. Poloczek, and D. R. Jiang. Subgoal-based exploration via Bayesian optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1910.09143, 2022.

Z. Wang. Intertemporal price discrimination via reference price effects. Operations research, 64(2):290–296,
  2016.

W. Wongthatsanekorn, M. J. Realff, and J. C. Ammons. Multi-time scale Markov decision process approach
  to strategic network growth of reverse supply chains. Omega, 38(1-2):20–32, 2010.

B. Yang, W. Li, J. Wang, J. Yang, T. Wang, and X. Liu. A novel path planning algorithm for warehouse
  robots based on a two-dimensional grid model. IEEE Access, 8:80347–80357, 2020.

J. Y. Yu and S. Mannor. Arbitrarily modulated Markov decision processes. In Proceedings of the 48h IEEE
  Conference on Decision and Control, pages 2946–2953. IEEE, 2009.

A. Zanette, A. Lazaric, M. J. Kochenderfer, and E. Brunskill. Limiting extrapolation in linear approximate
  value iteration. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 5616–5625, 2019.

X. Zhao, F. Fan, X. Liu, and J. Xie. Storage-space capacitated inventory system with (r, q) policies.
  Operations research, 55(5):854–865, 2007.

C. Zhu, J. Zhou, W. Wu, and L. Mo. Hydropower portfolios management via Markov decision process. In
  IECON 2006-32nd Annual Conference on IEEE Industrial Electronics, pages 2883–2888. IEEE, 2006.


                                                     44
                 Online Supplement:
Faster Reinforcement Learning by Freezing Slow States

                                 Yijia Wang1 and Daniel R. Jiang2,1
                             1
                                 University of Pittsburgh, 2 AI at Meta




A     Empirical Versions of VI and FSVI


Algorithm 5: Empirical VI for the Base Model (Base E-VI)
    Input: Initial values U 0 , number of iterations k, and number of next state samples M .
    Output: Approximation to the optimal policy ν k .
1 for k ′ = 1, 2, . . . , k do

2      for s in the state space S do
                                           M
             k′                    1 X k′ −1 (a,j)
3          U (s) = max r(s, a) + γ    U     (s     ), where s(a,j) is sampled from the
                    a              M
                                           j=1
            generative model, conditional on state s and action a.
4    end
5 end

6 for s in the state space S do

                                          M
                                       1 X k (a,j)
7      ν k (s) = arg max r(s, a) + γ      U (s     ), where s(a,j) is sampled from the generative
                     a                 M
                                          j=1
        model, conditional on state s and action a.
8 end




                                                    45
 Algorithm 6: Empirical Frozen-State Value Iteration (E-FSVI)
     Input: Initial values JT∗ ≡ 0 and V 0 , number of iterations k, and number of next-state
            samples Ml (lower level), Mu (upper level).
     Output: Approximation of the T -periodic frozen-state policy (µ̃k , π̃ ∗ ) and J1∗ .
 1 for each slow state x ∈ X do

 2      for t = T − 1, T − 2, . . . , 1 do
 3            for each fast state y ∈ Y do
                                                                 M
                                                             1 Xl ∗
 4                     Jt∗ (x, y) = max r(x, y, a) + γ           Jt+1 (x, y (a,j) ), where y (a,j) is sampled from
                                       a                     Ml
                                                                j=1
                        the generative model, conditional on state (x, y) and action a.
                                                                       Ml
                                                            1          X
                                                                              ∗
 5                     π̃t∗ (x, y) = arg max r(x, y, a) + γ                  Jt+1 (x, y (a,j) ), with y (a,j) defined the
                                         a                  Ml
                                                                       j=1
                        same way as above.
 6       end
 7    end
 8 end

 9 for k ′ = 1, 2, . . . , k do

10      for s0 = (x0 , y0 ) in the state space X × Y do
                                                          Mu h
                  k′                                   1 X               T k′ −1 (a,j) (a,j)
                                                                                                    i
11            V        (x0 , y0 , J1∗ , π̃ ∗ ) = max          R̃ (a,j)
                                                                       +γ V                  ∗    ∗
                                                                                (xT , yT , J1 , π̃ ) , where
                                                  a    Mu
                                              j=1
                (a,j) (a,j)
               xT , yT , and R̃   (a,j) are sampled using a T -step transition through the
               generative model, conditioned on x0 , y0 , a, π̃ ∗ and J1∗ .
12      end
13 end

14 for s0 = (x0 , y0 ) in the state space X × Y do

                                    Mu h
                                1 X                  T k (a,j) (a,j) ∗    ∗
                                                                            i
                                                                                      (a,j) (a,j)
15
          k
        µ̃ (x0 , y0 ) = arg max          R̃ (a,j)
                                                  + γ V (xT , yT , J1 , π̃ ) , where xT , yT ,
                            a   M u            j=1
         and R̃(a,j) are sampled as above, conditioned on x0 , y0 , a, π̃ ∗ and J1∗ .
16 end




                                                                  46
B     Implementation Details for Experimental Results

B.1    Ignoring the Slow State

For Slow-Agn Base VI, our goal is to simulate the situation where a decision maker neglects to

consider the slow state during modeling. In other words, we model the problem as if the state

consists only of the fast component, intentionally ignoring the slow state altogether. We implement

this in our experiments as follows:

    • Full-to-partial state conversion. The environment always operates on the full state space,

      which includes both fast and slow components. However, the Slow-Agn E-VI algorithm only

      observes the fast component (i.e., a partial state). Whenever the environment returns a state

      to the algorithm, it extracts and passes only the fast component.

    • Partial-to-full state conversion. When the algorithm queries the environment (e.g., for

      rewards or next states) using a partial state and an action, we construct a corresponding

      full state by randomly sampling a slow state uniformly and appending it to the given fast

      component. This synthesized full state is then used by the environment to transition forward.


B.2    Gridworld with Spatial Tasks

We describe the rewards used in the environment. The agent receives a reward of 2.0 for picking up

the object for every task. We specify the completion reward r(i, w) for task i in reward state w as

follows. For i = 1, . . . , 4, we have (r(i, 0), r(i, 1)) = (80, 6); for i = 5, 6, we have (r(i, 0), r(i, 1)) =

(1, 1); and for i = 7, 8, we have (r(i, 0), r(i, 1)) = (2, 30). Note that the high rewards switch from

the outer ring to inner ring depending on the value of wt , which changes state from either 0 to 1 or

1 to 0 with probability 0.02.



C     Value Function Approximation with a Linear Architecture

In this section, we explore the use of a linear architecture for a more compact representation of

the value function. We show how approximate VI (AVI) can be combined with the frozen-state

approximation, resulting in an algorithm that can scale to fast-slow MDPs with much larger state


                                                      47
spaces. The form of AVI that we use is based on the technique first proposed in Tsitsiklis and

Van Roy (1996) and later also used in Zanette et al. (2019). A technical contribution we make here

is to prove error bounds when this approximation architecture is used in a hierarchical setting that

combines finite-horizon and infinite-horizon components (i.e., our frozen-state VI).


C.1    The Approximation Architecture
                                         ⊺
Let ϕ(s) = ϕ1 (s), ϕ2 (s), . . . , ϕM (s) ∈ RM be an M -dimensional feature vector evaluated at state

s ∈ S. An approximation {Jˆt (ωt )}Tt=1 of the lower-level value functions {Jt∗ }Tt=1 of the frozen-

state approximation is given by a sequence of parameter vectors {ωt }Tt=1 with ωt ∈ RM , where the

component of Jˆt (ωt ) associated with s is given by


                              Jˆt (s, ωt ) = ϕ⊺ (s) ωt ,   for t = 1, 2, . . . , T.


(Note that since JT∗ ≡ 0, we can set ωT = 0.) The approximation V̂ (β) to the upper-level value

function (of the frozen-state model) V ∗ (J1∗ , π̃ ∗ ) is given by a parameter vector β ∈ RM , where


                                            V̂ (s, β) = ϕ⊺ (s) β.


For simplicity, we have used the same features in both the upper and lower levels.

   It is well-known that naive specifications of approximate value iteration applied to linear architec-

tures can produce divergent behavior (Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis, 1996). To circumvent this potential

issue, our algorithmic approach depends on a set of pre-selected states S̃ = {s1 , s2 , . . . , sM }, an

idea popularized in Tsitsiklis and Van Roy (1996), who showed that if certain assumptions on these

states and the feature vectors are satisfied, then divergence is avoided. A similar algorithm is also

described more recently in Zanette et al. (2019).

   In this section, we need an ordering of the state space, so without loss of generality, we assume

that S = {1, 2, . . . , N } and that the first M are the pre-selected states, i.e., sm = m for m =

1, 2, . . . , M . We make the following assumption on the feature vectors; this is essentially Assumption

2 of Tsitsiklis and Van Roy (1996), adapted to our setting.

Assumption 3. Let S̃ = {s1 , s2 , . . . , sM } be a set of pre-selected anchor states. Suppose the fol-


                                                      48
lowing conditions on the features ϕ are satisfied.


  1. The vectors ϕ(s1 ), ϕ(s2 ), . . . , ϕ(sM ) are linearly independent.

  2. There exists some γ ′ ∈ [γ, 1) such that for any state s ∈ S, there are coefficients θm (s) ∈ R

      for m = 1, 2, . . . , M satisfying:

                              M                                        M
                              X                                     γ′ X
                                   |θm (s)| ≤ 1    and     ϕ(s) =        θm (s) ϕ(sm ).
                                                                    γ
                             m=1                                      m=1



The interpretation of this assumption is that the feature space {ϕ(s) | s ∈ S} lies in the convex hull
                                                                   M
of the points defined by the pre-selected states: ±(γ ′ /γ) ϕ(sm ) m=1 . To reduce notional clutter, we
                                                 

will define κ = γ ′ /γ to be the amplification factor induced by the features.

   Following Tsitsiklis and Van Roy (1996), we let Φ ∈ RN ×M be a matrix with the s-th row equal

to ϕ⊺ (s) and let L ∈ RM ×M be a matrix with the m-th row equal to ϕ⊺ (sm ). If we let G be the

remaining rows of Φ, then we see that Φ = L; G . Next, by Assumption 3, the matrix L has a
                                               

unique matrix inverse L−1 ∈ RM ×M . We define Φ† ∈ RM ×N as follows: for m ∈ {1, 2, . . . , M },

suppose the m-th column of Φ† is equal to the m-th column of L−1 , and let all the other entries of

Φ† be zero. In other words, Φ† = [L−1 0]. Therefore, we see that Φ† is a left inverse of Φ:

                                                         
                                                          L
                                       †          −1             −1
                                                           
                                     Φ Φ = [L          0] 
                                                            = L L = I,
                                                            
                                                           
                                                           G


where I ∈ RM ×M is the identity matrix.


C.2    Frozen-State Approximate Value Iteration

Recall the lower-level Bellman operator H̄ from (12) and the upper-level Bellman operator FJˆ1 ,π̂ de-

fined in (15). The high-level idea behind our new approach, frozen-state approximate value iteration

(FSAVI) is as follows:

   • Lower-level AVI. We first run approximate value iteration (under basis functions Φ) for

      the lower-level problem. Letting ωT∗ = 0, the parameter ωt∗ is estimated by first evalu-

                                                         49
     ating H̄ Jˆt+1 (ωt+1
                       ∗ ) at the pre-selected states, and then computing ω ∗ so that Jˆ (s, ω ∗ ) =
                                                                           t            t     t
                 ∗ ) (s) for s ∈ S̃.
      H̄ Jˆt+1 (ωt+1
                     


   • Upper-level AVI. Suppose that after solving the lower level, we have parameter vectors

     ω ∗ = (ω1∗ , ω2∗ , . . . , ωT∗ ), implying lower-level value functions Jˆt (ωt∗ ) = Φωt∗ and an associated

     greedy policy π̂(ω ∗ ) = (π̂1 (ω ∗ ), . . . , π̂T −1 (ω ∗ )):


                            π̂t (x, y, ω ∗ ) = arg max r(x, y, a) + γ E Jˆt+1 (x, y ′ , ωt+1
                                                                                         ∗
                                                                                                          (21)
                                                                                             
                                                                                             ) .
                                                   a


     For the upper level, the parameter βk is updated to βk+1 in iteration k + 1 by first evaluating

     FJˆ1 (ω∗ ),π̂(ω∗ ) V̂ (βk ) at the pre-selected states, then computing βk+1 so that V̂ (s, βk+1 ) =
            1

      FJˆ1 (ω∗ ),π̂(ω∗ ) V̂ (βk ) (s) for s ∈ S̃. Note that, taking Φ as fixed, the dependence of the upper
                                 
             1

     level on the lower level can be represented succinctly through ω ∗ . Therefore, we will use the

     simplified notation Fω := FJˆ1 (ω1 ),π̂(ω) going forward.

To start, we define two new Bellman operators for the parameter space:


                                 H̄ ′ = Φ† ◦ H̄ ◦ Φ and Fω′ = Φ† ◦ Fω ◦ Φ.


To understand the definition of H ′ , consider the lower level. Suppose we start with a parameter
        ∗ , representing an approximate value function at time period t + 1 given by Jˆ
vector ωt+1                                                                                  ∗
                                                                                       t+1 (ωt+1 ) =

  ∗ . The update to the next parameter vector ω ∗ is obtained by applying H̄ to Jˆ
                                                                                  t+1 (ωt+1 ), as
Φωt+1                                                                                   ∗
                                               t

we would normally do, and then applying Φ† to project back to the parameter space. For the upper

level, a similar logic holds to go from βi to βi+1 : we first have the approximate upper-level value

function V̂ (βi ) = Φβk and then apply the normal Bellman update Fω∗ , before lastly obtaining the

updated parameter βi+1 using Φ† . Therefore, we have


                                   ωt∗ = H̄ ′ (ωt+1
                                                ∗
                                                    ) and βi+1 = Fω′ ∗ (βi ).


We show in the Lemma G.5 of the Appendix that Fω′ ∗ is an (κγ T )-contraction in the norm ∥ · ∥Φ on

RM defined by ∥β∥Φ = ∥Φβ∥∞ and therefore has a fixed point β ∗ . We now define two quantities

related to the approximation error of the linear architecture.


                                                           50
Definition 3. Define the linear architecture approximation error for the lower level as


                                εlow = maxt∈{1,2,...,T } inf ωt ∈RM Jt∗ − Jˆt (ωt ) ∞ .                (22)


Let Vω∗ be the fixed point of Fω . For the upper level, we define error ϵup as


                                      εup = supω inf β∈RM Vω∗ − V̂ (β) ∞ .                             (23)


Both (22) and (23) are related to the approximation errors defined in Tsitsiklis and Van Roy (1996);

moreover, taking a uniform bound over quantities that need to be approximated resembles the errors

defined in Munos and Szepesvári (2008).


 Algorithm 7: Frozen-State Approximate Value Iteration (FSAVI)
     Input: S̃ = {s1 , s2 , . . . , sM }, ϕ, initial weights ωT = β0 = 0, number of iterations k.
     Output: Approximation of the T -periodic frozen-state policy µ̂(βk , ω∗ ) , π̂ω∗ and Jˆ1 (ω ∗ )
                                                                                         

 1 for t = T − 1, T − 2, . . . , 1 do

 2      for each pre-selected state s = (x, y) ∈ S̃ do
           Jt (x, y) = maxa r(x, y, a) + γ E Jˆt+1 (x, fY (x, y, a, w), ωt+1 ) .
                                                                             
 3

 4      end
 5    Set remaining entries of Jt to zero. Update parameter vector: ωt∗ = Φ† Jt .
 6 end
 7 Let π̂ω ∗ be greedy with respect to Jˆt (ωt∗ ) = Φωt∗ , similar to (21).

 8 for i = 1, 2, . . . , k do

 9      for each pre-selected state s0 ∈ S̃ do
           V i (s0 ) = maxa E R̃(s, a, Jˆ1 (ω1∗ )) + γ T V̂ (sT (a, π̃avi ), βi−1 ) .
                                                                                  
10

11        Set remaining entries of V i to zero. Update parameter vector: βi = Φ† V i .
12    end
13 end
14 for s0 in the state space S do

      µ̂(βk , ω∗ ) (s0 ) = arg maxa E R̃(s0 , a, Jˆ1 (ω1∗ )) + γ T V̂ (sT (a, π̃ω∗ ), βk ) .
                                                                                         
15

16 end




Theorem C.1. Let (µ̂(βk , ω∗ ) , π̂ω∗ ) be the result after running FSAVI for k iterations for a given



                                                          51
S̃ and ϕ. The regret incurred when running (µ̂(βk , ω∗ ) , π̂ω∗ ) in the base model satisfies

                               2γ T
                                                 
                                             2
                                                   ϵr,avi (γ, α, dY , L, T, γ ′ , εlow )
                     
 R µ̂(βk , ω∗ ) , π̂ω∗ ≤               +
                            (1 − γ T )2 1 − γ T
                                                                                      2
         2γ 2T          2γ T                                                             κ − κ2 (κγ)T +1
                                                                                                        
                                                       1+κ                       T k
 +                   +          LU d(α, dY , T ) +                εup + (κγ )                                rmax ,
      (1 − γ T )2 1 − γ T                            1 − κγ T                           (1 − κγ T )(1 − κγ)

where the reward error is given by

                                                                                        (κγ)T (1 + γ)
                                                                                                     
                                    ′                                           1+κ
           ϵr,avi (γ, α, dY , L, T, γ , εlow ) = ϵr (γ, α, dY , L, T ) +              −                εlow .
                                                                               1 − κγ     γ − κγ 2

Proof. See Appendix G.2.



D      Proofs from Sections 3 and 4

D.1     Technical Lemmas

Lemma D.1. Consider a (α, dY )-fast-slow MDP. For any states (x0 , y0 ) and (x̃0 , ỹ0 ), let (xt , yt )

and (x̃t , ỹt ) be the states reached after t transitions under a policy π = (π0 , . . . , πt−1 ), i.e., (xt , yt ) =

f π (xt−1 , yt−1 , wt ) and (x̃t , ỹt ) = f π (x̃t−1 , ỹt−1 , w̃t ). Then, for any policy π, we have

  (i) ∥xt − x̃0 ∥2 ≤ tαdY + ∥x0 − x̃0 ∥2 ,

 (ii) ∥xt − x̃t ∥2 ≤ 2tαdY + ∥x0 − x̃0 ∥2 ,

(iii) ∥yt − ỹt ∥2 ≤ 2tdY + ∥y0 − ỹ0 ∥2 .

Proof. Lemma D.1 is a consequence of Assumption 1.

    The following two lemmas are about properties of the Bellman operators H and H̃ (recall that

H̃ is the frozen-state version).

Lemma D.2. For any state (x, y) and any two value functions V, V ′ : X × Y → R, we have


                         |(H̃ t V )(x, y) − (H̃ t V ′ )(x, y)| ≤ γ t max V (x, y) − V ′ (x, y) ,
                                                                   y∈Yxt



where Yst is the set of fast states reachable from s = (x, y) after t transitions of fY (x, ·, ·, ·).


                                                           52
Proof. The result follows by the contraction property of the Bellman operators.

Lemma D.3 (Discrepancy between H and H̃). Consider a value function V : X × Y → R. Suppose

there exists LV > 0 such that for any states (x, y) and (x̃, ỹ), it holds that |V (x, y) − V (x̃, ỹ)| ≤

LV ∥(x, y) − (x̃, ỹ)∥2 . Then,


   (H t V )(x, y) − (H̃ t V )(x̃, ỹ)
                                  X  t−1                           X t−1    i−1              t−1    
                                                                                   Ljf + LV γ t     Ljf .
                                                                               X                X
        ≤ (x, y) − (x̃, ỹ) 2 Lr          (γLf )i + LV (γLf )t + αdY Lr     γi
                                       i=0                                            i=1      j=0                j=0


Proof. We need to show that for each t ≥ 1,


                     (H t V )(x, y) − (H̃ t V )(x̃, ỹ) ≤ ϕt,1 (x, y) − (x̃, ỹ) 2 + ϕt,2 (αdY ),                        (24)


for coefficients ϕt,1 and ϕt,2 defined as

               X t−1                                 X t−1     i−1             t−1    
                                                                       j               j
                                                                  X               X
        ϕt,1 = Lr           i
                      (γLf ) + LV (γLf )t
                                            and ϕt,2 = Lr     γ i
                                                                      Lf + LV γ t
                                                                                      Lf .
                         i=0                                                    i=1     j=0                j=0


Let (x′ , y ′ ) = (fX (x, y, a, w), fY (x, y, a, w)) and (x̃′ , ỹ ′ ) = (fX (x̃, ỹ, a, w), fY (x̃, ỹ, a, w)) be one-step

transitions starting from (x, y) and (x̃, ỹ), according to the true system dynamics. For t = 1:


          (HV )(x, y) − (H̃V )(x̃, ỹ)
                     n                           o     n                                  o
            = max r(x, y, a) + γ E[V (x′ , y ′ )] − max r(x̃, ỹ, ã) + γ E[V (x̃, ỹ ′ )]
                     a                                             ã

               ≤ Lr (x, y) − (x̃, ỹ) 2 + γ max E V (x′ , y ′ ) − V (x̃, ỹ ′ )
                                                    a

               ≤ Lr (x, y) − (x̃, ỹ) 2 + LV γ max E ∥(x′ , y ′ ) − (x̃, ỹ ′ )∥2
                                                        a

               = Lr (x, y) − (x̃, ỹ) 2 + LV γ max E ∥(x′ , y ′ ) − (x̃′ , ỹ ′ )∥2 + ∥(x̃′ , ỹ ′ ) − (x̃, ỹ ′ )∥2
                                                                                                                    
                                                        a
                                                                            
               ≤ Lr (x, y) − (x̃, ỹ) 2 + LV γ Lf ∥(x, y) − (x̃, ỹ)∥2 + αdY

               = ϕ1,1 (x, y) − (x̃, ỹ) 2 + ϕ1,2 (αdY ),




                                                              53
which verifies the base case. Let us now assume that (24) holds for t − 1.


      (H t V )(x, y) − (H̃ t V )(x̃, ỹ)
                    n                                  o     n                                          o
           = max r(x, y, a) + γ E[(HV )t−1 (x′ , y ′ )] − max r(x̃, ỹ, ã) + γ E[(H̃V )t−1 (x̃, ỹ ′ )]
                 a                                                       ã

           ≤ Lr (x, y) − (x̃, ỹ) 2 + γ max E (HV )t−1 (x′ , y ′ ) − (H̃V )t−1 (x̃, ỹ ′ )
                                         a
                                       h                                                   i
           ≤ Lr (x, y) − (x̃, ỹ) 2 + γ ϕt−1,1 (x′ , y ′ ) − (x̃, ỹ ′ ) 2 + ϕt−1,2 (αdY )
                                       h                                                    i
           ≤ Lr (x, y) − (x̃, ỹ) 2 + γ ϕt−1,1 Lf (x, y) − (x̃, ỹ) 2 + αdY + ϕt−1,2 (αdY )
                                                                             
           ≤ Lr + γLf ϕt−1,1           (x, y) − (x̃, ỹ) 2 + γϕt−1,1 + γϕt−1,2 (αdY ),


where the second inequality follows by the induction hypothesis and the third inequality follows by

the same steps as in the case of t = 1. It is straightforward to verify that


                          ϕt,1 = Lr + γLf ϕt−1,1           and ϕt,2 = γϕt−1,1 + γϕt−1,2 ,


which completes the induction step and the proof.


D.2     Proof of Proposition 3.1

We consider an MDP ⟨S, A, W, f, r, γ⟩ and note that U ∗ is the unique optimal solution of the base

model (5), and there exists a stationary optimal policy ν ∗ (x, y) = arg max U ∗ (x, y) that attains this

optimal value (Bertsekas and Shreve, 2004, Proposition 4.3). Fix a state s0 ∈ S and for t > 0 and

a sequence of policies π0 , . . . , πt−1 , define the notation:


            s1 (π0 ) = f π0 (s0 , w1 ) and st′ +1 (π0 , . . . , πt′ ) = f πt′ (st′ (π0 , . . . , πt′ −1 ), wt′ +1 )


for t′ ≥ 1. Therefore, we have


               U ∗ (s0 ) = max r(s0 , π0 ) + γ E U ∗ (s1 (π0 )) = r(s0 , ν ∗ ) + γ E U ∗ (s1 (ν ∗ )) .                (25)
                                                                                                 
                             π0




                                                             54
By expanding the U ∗ (s1 (π0 )) and U ∗ (s1 (ν ∗ )) terms in (25), we have the following:

                                      h                                                          i
                     U ∗ (s0 ) = max E r(s0 , π0 ) + γ r(s1 (π0 ), π1 ) + γ 2 U ∗ (s2 (π0 , π1 ))
                                  π0 ,π1
                                  h                                                            i
                               = E r(s0 , ν) + γ r(s1 (ν ∗ ), ν ∗ ) + γ 2 U ∗ (s2 (ν ∗ , ν ∗ )) .


Let π = (π0 , π1 , . . . , πT −1 ). Repeating the expansion, we obtain:

                                     "T −1                                                                                      #
                                      X
                 ∗                                                                              ∗
                                               t                                            T
                                                                                                                                    (26)
                                                                                                                           
             U (s0 ) = max E                 γ r st (π0 , . . . , πt−1 ), πt + γ U                  sT (π0 , . . . , πT −1 )
                           π
                                       t=0
                            "T −1                                                                                #
                             X
                                     γ t r st (ν ∗ , . . . , ν ∗ ), ν   ∗
                                                                              + γ T U ∗ sT (ν ∗ , . . . , ν ∗ ) .                   (27)
                                                                                                              
                       =E
                               t=0


Observe that (26) is in same form as the Bellman equation (8) for the hierarchical reformulation

(with T -horizon reward function R and value function Ū ), which has a unique optimal solution Ū ∗ .

Therefore U ∗ (s0 ) = Ū ∗ (s0 ) and (i) is proved when we recall that s0 was chosen arbitrarily. Part (ii)

follows because by (27), it is clear that (ν ∗ , . . . , ν ∗ ) solves (26) and hence also (8).



E     Proofs for Section 6 and Section 7

E.1    Technical Lemmas

Lemma E.1. Consider two MDPs, M1 and M2 , who differ in their transition and reward functions:

Mi = ⟨S, A, W, fi , ri , γ⟩. Let Ui∗ be the optimal value function of Mi . Suppose that

(a) |r1 (s, a) − r2 (s, a)| ≤ ϵr for all s ∈ S and a ∈ A;

(b) ∥f1 (s, a, w) − f2 (s, a, w)∥2 ≤ d for all s ∈ S, a ∈ A, and w ∈ W; and

(c) there exists L1 > 0 such that |U1∗ (s) − U1∗ (s′ )| ≤ L1 ∥s − s′ ∥2 for all s, s′ ∈ S.

Then, the difference in optimal values of the two MDPs can be bounded as follows:

                                                                                ϵr + γL1 d
                                               U1∗ (s) − U2∗ (s) ≤
                                                                                   1−γ

for all s ∈ S.



                                                                   55
Proof. Let ŝ = arg maxs∈S |U1∗ (s) − U2∗ (s)|. We will analyze U1∗ (ŝ) − U2∗ (ŝ) .

                         n                                      o      n                                        o
U1∗ (ŝ) − U2∗ (ŝ) = max r1 (ŝ, a1 ) + γ E U1∗ f1 (ŝ, a1 , w)    − max r2 (ŝ, a2 ) + γ E U2∗ (f2 (ŝ, a2 , w))
                                                                                           
                      a1 ∈A                                                a2 ∈A

                  ≤ max r1 (ŝ, a) + γ E U1∗ f1 (ŝ, a, w) − r2 (ŝ, a) − γ E U2∗ (f2 (ŝ, a, w))
                                                                                              
                     a∈A

                  ≤ max r1 (ŝ, a) − r2 (ŝ, a) + γ max E U1∗ f1 (ŝ, a, w) − E U2∗ f2 (ŝ, a, w)
                                                                                              
                     a∈A                                a∈A

                  ≤ ϵr + γ max E U1∗ f1 (ŝ, a, w) − U1∗ f2 (ŝ, a, w)
                                                                     
                               a∈A

                        + γ max E U1∗ f2 (ŝ, a, w) − U2∗ f2 (ŝ, a, w)
                                                                      
                               a∈A

                  ≤ ϵr + γL1 max ∥f1 (ŝ, a, w) − f2 (ŝ, a, w)∥2 + γ max U1∗ (s) − U2∗ (s)
                                  a,w                                        s∈S

                  ≤ ϵr + γL1 d + γ U1∗ (ŝ) − U2∗ (ŝ) .


Rearranging, we have
                                                                  ϵr + γL1 d
                                          U1∗ (ŝ) − U2∗ (ŝ) ≤              ,
                                                                     1−γ

which completes the proof if we recall how ŝ was chosen.

Lemma E.2. Consider two MDPs, M1 and M2 , who differ in their transition and reward functions:

Mi = ⟨S, A, W, fi , ri , γ⟩. Let Ui∗ be the optimal value function of Mi . Suppose that

(a) |r1 (s, a) − r2 (s, a)| ≤ ϵr for all s ∈ S and a ∈ A;

(b) ∥f1 (s, a, w) − f2 (s, a, w)∥2 ≤ d for all s ∈ S, a ∈ A and w ∈ W;

(c) there exists L1 > 0 such that |U1∗ (s) − U1∗ (s′ )| ≤ L1 ∥s − s′ ∥2 for any s, s′ ∈ S; and

(d) |U1∗ (s) − U2∗ (s)| ≤ ϵU for all s ∈ S.

Let π̃2 be a policy that is an approximation of the optimal policy for M2 , in the sense that:

                                               n                                   o
                              π̃2 (s) = arg max r̃2 (s, a) + γ E Ũ2 f˜2 (s, a, w)                         (28)
                                                                
                                                                                      ,
                                         a∈A


where |r2 (s, a) − r̃2 (s, a)| ≤ ϵ̃r , ∥f2 (s, a, w) − f˜2 (s, a, w)∥2 ≤ d,
                                                                         ˜ and |U ∗ (s) − Ũ2 (s)| ≤ ϵ̃U for all
                                                                                 2




                                                         56
s ∈ S, a ∈ A, and w ∈ W. Then, the value of π̃2 when implemented in M1 has regret bounded by:

                                                  2(ϵr + ϵ̃r ) + 2γ(ϵU + ϵ̃U ) + 2γL1 (d + ˜
                                                                                           d)
                            U1∗ − U1π̃2 ∞ ≤                                                   .
                                                                     1−γ

This lemma is a generalization and extension of Corollary 1 of Singh and Yee (1994).

Proof. Let π1∗ be an optimal policy for M1 . Using (28), it follows that


            r̃2 (s, π1∗ (s)) + γ E Ũ2 (f˜2 (s, π1∗ (s), w)) ≤ r̃2 (s, π̃2 (s)) + γ E Ũ2 (f˜2 (s, π̃2 (s), w)) .              (29)
                                                                                                            



Set ϵU = ϵU + ϵ̃U , ϵr = ϵr + ϵ̃r . Combining parts (a) and (d) in the statement of the lemma

with the approximation errors of Ũ2 and r̃2 , we know that U1∗ (s) − ϵU ≤ Ũ2 (s) ≤ U1∗ (s) + ϵU and

r1 (s, a) − ϵr ≤ r̃2 (s, a) ≤ r1 (s, a) + ϵr for any s and a. Using these, we can lower bound both

terms on the left-hand-side of (29), upper bound both terms on the right-hand-side of (29), and

then rearrange to obtain


   r1 (s, π1∗ (s)) − r1 (s, π̃2 (s)) ≤ 2ϵr + 2γϵU + γ E U1∗ (f˜2 (s, π̃2 (s), w)) − U1∗ (f˜2 (s, π1∗ (s), w)) .                (30)
                                                                                                            



Let state ŝ = arg maxs∈S U1∗ (ŝ) − U1π̃2 (ŝ) be the state that achieves the largest regret (when using

π̃2 in M1 ). Substituting from (30) gives


   U1∗ (ŝ) − U1π̃2 (ŝ) = r1 (ŝ, π1∗ (ŝ)) − r1 (ŝ, π̃2 (ŝ)) + γ E U1∗ (f1 (ŝ, π1∗ (ŝ), w)) − U1π̃2 (f1 (ŝ, π̃2 (ŝ), w))
                                                                                                                               


                         ≤ 2ϵr + 2γϵU + γ E U1∗ (f˜2 (ŝ, π̃2 (ŝ), w)) − U1∗ (f˜2 (ŝ, π1∗ (ŝ), w))
                                                                                                          


                                + γ E U1∗ (f1 (ŝ, π1∗ (ŝ), w)) − U1π̃2 (f1 (ŝ, π̃2 (ŝ), w))
                                                                                                 


                        = 2ϵr + 2γϵU + γ E U1∗ (f˜2 (ŝ, π̃2 (ŝ), w)) − U1∗ (f1 (ŝ, π̃2 (ŝ), w))
                                                                                                  


                              + γ E U1∗ (f1 (ŝ, π1∗ (ŝ), w)) − U1∗ (f˜2 (ŝ, π1∗ (ŝ), w))
                                                                                           


                              + γ E U1∗ (f1 (ŝ, π̃2 (ŝ), w)) − U1π̃2 (f1 (ŝ, π̃2 (ŝ), w))
                                                                                            

                                                 ˜ + γ U ∗ (ŝ) − U π̃2 (ŝ) ,
                                                                            
                        ≤ 2ϵr + 2γϵU + 2γL1 (d + d)     1          1



where we have used property (c) and that ∥f1 (s, a, w)− f˜2 (s, a, w)∥2 ≤ d+ d.
                                                                             ˜ Therefore, we rearrange




                                                                57
to see that
                                                                              ˜
                                                       2ϵr + 2γϵU + 2γL1 (d + d)
                             U1∗ (ŝ) − U1π̃2 (ŝ) ≤                             ,
                                                                 1−γ

completing the proof.

Lemma E.3. Consider an MDP ⟨S, A, W, f, r, γ⟩ with reward function r taking values in [0, rmax ].

Suppose the optimal value function is U ∗ and the associated Bellman operator is F . Fix any initial

value function such that 0 ≤ U0 (s) ≤ rmax /(1 − γ) for all s and let U k = F k U0 be the result after

iteration k of value iteration. Then, it holds that

                                                               γ k rmax
                                          ∥U k − U ∗ ∥∞ ≤               .
                                                                1−γ

Proof. This is a standard result that follows from the contraction property of F and the fact that

U k = F U k−1 . Therefore,

                                                                                         γ k rmax
       ∥U k − U ∗ ∥∞ = ∥HU k−1 − HU ∗ ∥∞ ≤ γ∥U k−1 − U ∗ ∥∞ ≤ γ k ∥U 0 − U ∗ ∥∞ ≤                 ,
                                                                                          1−γ

where in the last step, we used 0 ≤ U ∗ (s) ≤ rmax /(1 − γ) for all s.

Lemma E.4 (Proposition 6.1 of Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis (1996)). Consider an MDP ⟨S, A, W, f, r, γ⟩

with optimal value function U ∗ . Suppose that ν is a policy that is greedy with respect to another

value function U :
                                                                     
                             ν(s) = arg max r(s, a) + E U (f (s, a, w)) .
                                           a

If ∥U − U ∗ ∥∞ ≤ ε, then the performance of ν is bounded as follows:

                                                                 2γε
                                            ∥U ν − U ∗ ∥∞ ≤          .
                                                                1−γ

Lemma E.5. Let V k (J1∗ , π ∗ ) be the value function approximation obtained from running FSVI for

k iterations. Then, the “value iteration error” is given by

                                                                           γ kT rmax
                                 V k (J1∗ , π ∗ ) − V ∗ (J1∗ , π ∗ ) ∞ ≤             .
                                                                             1−γ




                                                          58
Proof. Consider the upper-level MDP. Note that the discount factor is γ T and the T -horizon reward

function
                                                                    1 − γT
                                                                              
                                           R̃(s0 , a, J1∗ ) ∈    0,        rmax .
                                                                     1−γ

The result follows by Lemma E.3.


E.2    Proof of Proposition 6.1

Using (17) and (18), the difference between the two reward functions can be expanded as follows:


E[R(s0 , a, π ∗ )] − E[R̃(s0 , a, J1∗ )]

   = r(x0 , y0 , a) + γ E[(H T −1 U ∗ )(x1 , y1 )] − γ T E[U ∗ (xT , yT )] − r(x0 , y0 , a) − γ E[(H̃ T −1 0)(x1 , y1 )]

   = γ E[(H T −1 U ∗ )(x1 , y1 )] − E[(H̃ T −1 0)(x1 , y1 )] − γ T −1 E[U ∗ (xT , yT )]

   ≤ γ E (H T −1 U ∗ )(x1 , y1 ) − (H̃ T −1 U ∗ )(x1 , y1 )
     |                        {z                           }
                             Term A

      + γ E (H̃ T −1 U ∗ )(x1 , y1 ) − (H̃ T −1 0)(x1 , y1 ) − γ T −1 U ∗ (xT , yT ) ,
        |                                    {z                                     }
                                            Term B


where (xt , yt ) is the state obtained after transitioning from (x0 , y0 ) according to the true dynamics

f = (fX , fY ) for t steps. We now work on Terms A and B separately.

    Noting that U ∗ has Lipschitz constant LU by Assumption 2, we can apply Lemma D.3 to Term

A to obtain
                                        TX−2     i−1                T −2    
                                                       j                   j
                                                  X                  X
                                                             T −1
                           Term A ≤ αdY Lr    γ i
                                                      Lf + γ      LU      Lf .                                     (31)
                                                       i=1        j=0                  j=0

    Moving on to Term B, since the reward function r ≥ 0, it follows that U ∗ (s) ≥ 0 for all s. Also,

the monotonicity of H̃ implies that (H̃ T −1 U ∗ ) ≥ (H̃ T −1 0). Therefore, applying Lemma D.2,


            (H̃ T −1 U ∗ )(x1 , y1 ) − (H̃ T −1 0)(x1 , y1 ) = (H̃ T −1 U ∗ )(x1 , y1 ) − (H̃ T −1 0)(x1 , y1 )

                                                                ≤ γ T −1 maxy∈YsT −1 U ∗ (x1 , y) − 0
                                                                                  1


                                                                = γ T −1 maxy∈YsT −1 U ∗ (x1 , y),
                                                                                  1




where YsT1−1 is the set of fast states reachable from s1 = (x1 , y1 ) after T −1 transitions of fY (x1 , ·, ·, ·).



                                                                59
Let ỹs1 = arg maxy∈YsT −1 U ∗ (x1 , y) be the fast state that attains the maximum. Note that ỹs1
                               1

depends on s1 , which is random. Combining with the rest of Term B, we have


                      Term B ≤ γ E γ T −1 U ∗ (x1 , ỹs1 ) − γ T −1 U ∗ (xT , yT )

                             ≤ max γ T U ∗ x1 (ω), ỹs1 (ω) − U ∗ xT (ω), yT (ω)
                                                                                  
                               ω∈Ω
                                                                                    
                             ≤ max γ T LU ∥x1 (ω) − xT (ω)∥2 + ∥ỹs1 (ω) − yT (ω)∥2                                          (32)
                                       ω∈Ω

                                   ≤ γ T LU dY (α + 2)(T − 1),                                                               (33)


where (32) follows by Assumption 2 and (33) comes from Lemma D.1 (we use that xT (ω) is T − 1

transitions from x1 (ω) and both ỹs1 (ω) and yT (ω) are both T − 1 transitions from y1 (ω)). Finally,

we have

                         TX−2     i−1                T −2    
                                        j                   j
                                   X                  X
                                              T −1
       Terms A + B ≤ αdY Lr    γ i
                                       Lf + γ      LU      Lf + γ T LU dY (α + 2)(T − 1)
                                          i=1        j=0                      j=0
                                         T −2        i−1                               T −2
                                                                            "                                          #
                                                           Ljf                                Ljf + γdY (α + 2)(T − 1)
                                         X           X                                 X
                          = αdY Lr              γi                   + γ T −1 LU αdY
                                         i=1         j=0                               j=0


which completes the proof.


E.3     Proof of Lemma 6.1

To analyze R(µ, π) = ∥Ū ∗ − Ū µ (π)∥∞ , we will consider two MDPs that operate on the T -period

timescale, one with optimal value Ū ∗ and the other with optimal value V ∗ (J1 , π). The reason

to study an MDP with optimal value V ∗ (J1 , π) is because µ can be viewed as an approximation

to the optimal policy for the second MDP, as suggested in (20). Since both MDPs are defined

on the T -period timescale, the transition functions are defined using T -period noise sequences

w = (w1 , w2 , . . . , wT ).

    • For Ū ∗ , let M1 = ⟨S, A, W, f1 , r1 , γ T ⟩ be the MDP associated with the base model refor-

       mulation (8), but with the lower-level policy fixed to be π ∗ . The reward function r1 is

       r1 (s, a) = E[R(s, a, π ∗ )]. Given a T -period noise sequence w, an initial state s, and action a,

       the “next” state f1 (s, a, w) = sT (a, π ∗ ) is the state obtained by first taking action a in state

       s and then following policy π ∗ for the next T − 1 steps.

                                                                      60
      • For V ∗ (J1 , π), let M2 = ⟨S, A, W, f2 , r2 , γ T ⟩ be the MDP associated with the frozen-state

        hierarchical approximation (14), where r2 is defined as r2 (s, a) = E[R̃(s, a, J1 )]. The transition

        function f2 is defined in the same way as f1 except we replace π ∗ by π.

Let ϵr (π ∗ , J1 ) = maxs,a |E[R(s, a, π ∗ )] − E[R̃(s, a, J1 )]|, so that we have |r1 (s, a) − r2 (s, a)| ≤

ϵr (π ∗ , J1 ). Noting that the first steps of f1 and f2 are the same (action a in state s with w1

revealed), applying parts (ii) and (iii) of Lemma D.1, the maximum discrepancy between f1 and f2

is:


                    ∥f1 (s, a, w) − f2 (s, a, w)∥2 ≤ d(α, dY , T ) := 2(α + 1)dY (T − 1).


Applying Lemma E.1, we see that

                                                   1                                        
                      Ū ∗ − V ∗ (J1 , π) ∞ ≤          ϵr (π ∗
                                                               , J1 ) + γ T
                                                                            LU d(α, d Y , T )  .
                                                1 − γT

We also need to account for the fact that µ is greedy with respect to V , an approximation of

the optimal value of M2 . More precisely, µ is greedy with respect to r2 (s, a) = E R̃(s0 , a, J1 ) ,
                                                                                                  

f2 (s, a, w) = sT (a, π), and value function V . We can thus apply Lemma E.2 with ϵr = ϵr (π ∗ , J1 ),

d = d(α, dY , T ), L1 = LU , ϵU = Ū ∗ − V ∗ (J1 , π) ∞ , and ϵ̃U = V − V ∗ (J1 , π̃) ∞ . Collecting terms

completes the proof.


E.4      Proof of Theorem 6.1

We apply Lemma 6.1 with π = π̃ ∗ , J1 = J1∗ , and V = V k (J1∗ , π ∗ ). The result follows by combining

it with the result of Lemma E.5 and noting that by Proposition 6.1, ϵr (π ∗ , J1∗ ) ≤ ϵr (γ, α, dY , L, T ).


E.5      Proof of Proposition 7.1

Since νk is greedy with respect to Uk , we can apply Lemmas E.3 and E.4 to obtain

                                                    2γ γ k rmax   2rmax γ k+1
                               ∥U νk − U ∗ ∥∞ ≤                 =             .
                                                   1−γ 1−γ         (1 − γ)2




                                                        61
F    Bounds on LU in Terms of Lr and Lf

We start with an assumption that, if true, leads to a simple bound on the Lipschitz constant LU .

The main result is in Proposition F.1.

Assumption 4. Suppose that γLf < 1, where the constant Lf , as defined in (3), is the sensitivity

of the transition function to small changes in (s, a).

Lemma F.1. Consider an (α, dY )-fast-slow MDP ⟨S, A, W, f, r, γ⟩ and let U : S → R be a value

function such that there exists LU > 0 where for any states s and s̃,


                                     |U (s) − U (s̃)| ≤ LU ∥s − s̃∥2 .                           (34)

                                                                             
Define the state-action value function Q(s, a) = r(s, a) + γ E U (f (s, a, w)) . Then, for any state-

action pairs (s, a) and (s̃, ã), the state-action value function Q satisfies

                                                                               
                      Q(s, a) − Q(s̃, ã) ≤ (Lr + γLU Lf ) ∥s − s̃∥2 + ∥a − ã∥2 .


Proof. For any state-action pairs (s, a), (s̃, ã) ∈ S × A, we have

                                                                                           
       Q(s, a) − Q(s̃, ã) ≤ |r(s, a) − r(s̃, ã)| + γ E U (f (s, a, w)) − U (f (s̃, ã, w))

                                                                                                 (35)
                                                        
                           ≤ Lr ∥s − s̃∥2 + ∥a − ã∥2 + γLU max f (s, a, w) − f (s̃, ã, w)) 2
                                                                  w

                                                                                                 (36)
                                                                                   
                          ≤ Lr ∥s − s̃∥2 + ∥a − ã∥2 + γLU Lf ∥s − s̃∥2 + ∥a − ã∥2
                                                                
                          ≤ (Lr + γLU Lf ) ∥s − s̃∥2 + ∥a − ã∥2 ,


where (35) follows by (34) and (36) follows by the definition of Lf in (3).

Lemma F.2. Consider an (α, dY )-fast-slow MDP ⟨S, A, W, f, r, γ⟩. Let Q : S × A → R be a

state-action value function and assume there exists LQ > 0 where for any states (s, a) and (s̃, ã),

                                                                         
                            Q(s, a) − Q(s̃, ã) ≤ LQ ∥s − s̃∥2 + ∥a − ã∥2 .                     (37)




                                                    62
Define U (s) = maxa Q(s, a). Then, for any states s and s̃, the value function U satisfies


                                      U (s) − U (s̃) ≤ LQ ∥s − s̃∥2 .


Proof. Note that:


                             U (s) − U (s̃) = max Q(s, a) − max Q(s̃, ã)
                                                  a               ã

                                            ≤ max Q(s, a) − Q(s̃, a)
                                                 a

                                            ≤ LQ ∥s − s̃∥2 ,


where the last inequality is by (37).

Lemma F.3. Consider an (α, dY )-fast-slow MDP ⟨S, A, W, f, r, γ⟩. Starting with U0 = 0, recur-

sively define Qk+1 and Uk+1 as follows:

                                                      
            Qk+1 (s, a) = r(s, a) + γ E Uk (f (s, a, w)     and   Uk+1 (s) = max Qk+1 (s, a).
                                                                              a



Then Uk is Lipschitz continuous and its Lipschitz constant LUk satisfies


                                        LUk = Lr + γLf LUk−1 .                                  (38)


Proof. The proof is by induction. For k = 1, note that Q1 (s, a) = r(s, a) and therefore has

Lipschitz constant Lr by (2). By Lemma F.2, it follows that U1 also has Lipschitz constant Lr .

Since LU0 = 0, we see that LU1 = Lr satisfies (38). Now, assume that LUk satisfies (38) for k ≥ 1.

Then, by Lemma F.1, Qk+1 is (Lr + γLf LUk )-Lipschitz continuous and by Lemma F.2, Uk+1 is

(Lr + γLf LUk )-Lipschitz continuous.

Proposition F.1. Consider an (α, dY )-fast-slow MDP ⟨S, A, W, f, r, γ⟩ and suppose Assumption 4

holds. Then, the optimal value U ∗ , as defined in (5), satisfies:

                                                            Lr
                                  U ∗ (s) − U ∗ (s̃) ≤           s − s̃ 2
                                                         1 − γLf




                                                      63
for any states s, s̃ ∈ S.

Proof. According to Proposition 7.3.1 of Bertsekas (2012), the value Uk in Lemma F.3 converges to

the optimal value U ∗ (value iteration). The recursion (38) can be written as:

                                                                          k−1
                                                                          X
                        LUk = Lr + γLf Lr + · · · + (γLf )k−1 Lr =              (γLf )i Lr ,
                                                                          i=0


a convergent sequence since Assumption 4 is satisfied. Letting k → ∞, we see that U ∗ has Lipschitz

constant
                                                ∞
                                                X                       Lr
                                   lim LUk =          (γLf )i Lr =           ,
                                  k→∞                                1 − γLf
                                                i=0

completing the proof.



G     Proofs for Appendix C

G.1     Technical Lemmas

Lemma G.1. For any vectors J ∈ RN and J ′ ∈ RN , it holds that


                                 (ΦΦ† )(J) − (ΦΦ† )(J ′ ) ∞ ≤ κ ∥J − J ′ ∥∞


Proof. For simplicity, let D = Φ Φ† (J) − Φ† (J ′ ) be the term inside the norm on the left hand side.
                                                  

Then, for any state s, we have |D(s)| = ϕ⊺ (s) Φ† (J)−Φ† (J ′ ) . We select θ1 (s), θ1 (s), . . . , θM (s) ∈ R
                                                              

that satisfy Assumption 3, obtaining

                                          M
                                                              !
                                          X
                                               θm (s)ϕ⊺ (sm )     Φ† (J) − Φ† (J ′ )
                                                                                       
                            |D(s)| = κ
                                         m=1

                                  ≤ κ max ϕ⊺ (sm ) Φ† (J)) − Φ† (J ′ )
                                                                      
                                         m

                                  = κ max |D(sm )|
                                         m

                                  = κ max |J(sm ) − J ′ (sm )|
                                         m

                                  ≤ κ ∥J − J ′ ∥∞


where the third equality uses the fact that sm is a pre-selected state.

                                                       64
Lemma G.2. Given a lower-level value function ˆ
                                              J(ωt+1 ), recall that one approximate Bellman step
                                   ˆ t ) = ΦΦ† H̄ J(ω
in the lower level of FSAVI yields J(ω            ˆ t+1 ) in the value function space. If ωT = 0,

                                                   T −1
                             ˆ 1)
                                                   X               (κγ)T − 1
                             J(ω  ∞
                                    ≤ κrmax              (κγ)i =             κrmax .
                                                                     κγ − 1
                                                   i=0


Moreover, the upper-level reward function can be bounded as follows:

                                                         (κγ)T +1 − 1
                               E R̃(s0 , a, Jˆ1 (ω1 )) ≤
                                                     
                                                                      κrmax .
                                                           κγ − 1

Proof. The proof follows by Assumption 3 and some manipulation:

                                             M
                                                                    !
                                             X
                           ˆ t )(s) = κ            θm (s)ϕ⊺ (sm )        Φ† H̄ J(ω
                                                                               ˆ t+1 )
                                                                                      
                           J(ω
                                             m=1

                                       ≤ κ max ϕ⊺ (sm ) Φ† H̄ ˆ
                                                                     
                                                             J(ωt+1 )
                                            m

                                       = κ max H̄ ˆ
                                                       
                                                 J(ωt ) (sm )
                                            m

                                                     ˆ t+1 ) .
                                       = κ rmax + κγ J(ω    ∞



Applying the above inequality T − 1 times yields the first result. Next, we see that


                              E R̃(s0 , a, Jˆ1 (ω1 )) ≤ rmax + γ J(ω
                                                                 ˆ 1)
                                                    
                                                                      ∞

                                                                   ˆ 1)
                                                      ≤ κrmax + κγ J(ω  ∞
                                                                   T
                                                                   X
                                                      ≤ κrmax            (κγ)i ,
                                                                   i=0


where we used the fact that κ ≥ 1 in the second inequality.

Lemma G.3. Suppose (ω1∗ , ω2∗ , . . . , ωT∗ ) satisfies ωt∗ = H̄ ′ ωt+1
                                                                    ∗   for all t. Then, we have

                                          T −t
                                                                     (κγ)T (1 + γ)
                                                                                
                                       γ+1X                  1+κ
            Jt∗ − Jˆt (ωt∗ ) ∞ ≤    1+            i
                                              (κγ) εlow =          −                 εlow
                                        γ                   1 − κγ     γ − κγ 2
                                             i=1


a bound on the error of the value function approximation.

Proof. Let ε′ = εlow + δ for some δ > 0. For each t, choose a parameter vector ω̄t ∈ RM such that


                                                         65
∥Jt∗ − Jˆt (ω̄t )∥∞ < ε′ , which is possible by the definition of εlow . Then, it holds that


                Jˆt (ω̄t ) − ΦH̄ ′ (ω̄t+1 ) ∞ = Φω̄t − ΦΦ† H̄ Jˆt+1 (ω̄t+1 ) ∞

                                              = ΦΦ† Φω̄t − ΦΦ† H̄ Jˆt+1 (ω̄t+1 ) ∞

                                              ≤ κ Φω̄t − H̄ Jˆt+1 (ω̄t+1 ) ∞                              (39)

                                              = κ Jˆt (ω̄t ) − H̄ Jˆt+1 (ω̄t+1 ) ∞
                                                                                                
                                              ≤ κ Jˆt (ω̄t ) − Jt∗ ∞ + Jt∗ − H̄ Jˆt+1 (ω̄t+1 ) ∞
                                                                                         
                                              < κ ε′ + ∥H̄Jt+1 ∗
                                                                    − H̄ Jˆt+1 (ω̄t+1 )∥∞
                                                                                       
                                              ≤ κ ε′ + γ Jt+1  ∗
                                                                    − Jˆt+1 (ω̄t+1 ) ∞                    (40)

                                              < κ(γ + 1) ε′ .


where (39) is by Lemma G.1 and (40) follows by the contraction property of H̄. The next step is

the quantify the difference between Jˆt (ω̄t ) and Jˆt (ωt∗ ). Let ε′′ = κ(γ + 1) ε′ .


              Jˆt (ω̄t ) − Jˆt (ωt∗ ) ∞ ≤ Jˆt (ω̄t ) − ΦH̄ ′ (ω̄t+1 ) ∞ + ΦH̄ ′ (ω̄t+1 ) − Jˆt (ωt∗ ) ∞

                                     ≤ ε′′ + ΦΦ† H̄ Jˆt+1 (ω̄t+1 ) − ΦΦ† H̄ Jˆt+1 (ωt+1
                                                                                    ∗
                                                                                        ) ∞
                                                γ′
                                     ≤ ε′′ +                                      ∗
                                                   H̄ Jˆt+1 (ω̄t+1 ) − H̄ Jˆt+1 (ωt+1 ) ∞                 (41)
                                                γ
                                     ≤ ε′′ + γ ′ Jˆt+1 (ω̄t+1 ) − Jˆt+1 (ωt+1
                                                                           ∗
                                                                               ) ∞                        (42)
                                                                                                  
                                     ≤ ε′′ + γ ′ ϵ′′ + γ ′ Jˆt+2 (ω̄t+2 ) − Jˆt+2 (ωt+2
                                                                                    ∗
                                                                                        )      ∞

                                     ≤ ···
                                               −t−1
                                              TX
                                         ′′
                                     ≤ε              (γ ′ )i + (γ ′ )T −t JˆT (ω̄T ) − JˆT (ωT∗ ) ∞
                                               i=0
                                                      T −t
                                         γ+1 ′ X ′ i
                                     =      ε   (γ ) ,                                                    (43)
                                          γ
                                                      i=1


where (41) is by Lemma G.1, (42) is by the contraction property of H̄, and (43) because ωT∗ =

ω̄T = 0 (since JT (s) = 0 for all s). Therefore,


                        Jt∗ − Jˆt (ωt∗ ) ∞ ≤ Jt∗ − Jˆt (ω̄t ) ∞ + Jˆt (ω̄t ) − Jˆt (ωt∗ ) ∞


                                                             66
                                                            T −t     
                                                ′      γ+1X ′ i
                                             ≤ε 1+               (γ )
                                                         γ
                                                             i=1
                                                            T −t       
                                               ′       γ+1X           i
                                             =ε 1+               (κγ)
                                                         γ
                                                             i=1
                                                       γ + 1 κγ − (κγ)T
                                                                         
                                               ′
                                             =ε 1+
                                                         γ      1 − κγ
                                                             (κγ)T (1 + γ)
                                                                           
                                               ′    1+κ
                                             =ε            −                 .
                                                   1 − κγ       γ − κγ 2

Since δ can be arbitrarily small, the proof is complete.

Lemma G.4. Given an upper-level value function V̂ (βi ), recall that one approximate Bellman step

in the upper level of FSAVI yields V̂ (βi+1 ) = ΦΦ† Fω∗ V̂ (βi ) in the value function space. We have

                                                         κ2 − κ2 (κγ)T +1
                                        V̂ (β ∗ ) ≤                         rmax ,
                                                        (1 − κγ T )(1 − κγ)

where β ∗ is a fixed point of Fω′ ∗ .

Proof. Again, the proof follows by Assumption 3 and some manipulation:

                                                      M
                                                                           !
                                                      X
                                                                     ⊺
                                                                                Φ† Fω V̂ (βi )
                                                                                                 
                           V̂ (βi+1 )(s) = κ               θm (s)ϕ (sm )
                                                    m=1

                                            ≤ κ max ϕ⊺ (sm ) Φ† Fω V̂ (βi )
                                                                                   
                                                    m
                                                               
                                            = κ max Fω V̂ (βi ) (sm )
                                                    m

                                            ≤ κ Rmax + κγ T V̂ (βi ) ∞ ,


where Rmax is an upper bound on E R̃(s0 , a, Jˆ1 (ω1 )) from Lemma G.2. Starting with βi = 0 and
                                                      

applying the inequality repeatedly, we see that

                                                             ∞
                                        ∗
                                                             X                   κRmax
                                 V̂ (β ) ∞ ≤ κRmax                 (κγ T )j ≤            ,
                                                                                1 − κγ T
                                                             j=0


which completes the proof.

Lemma G.5. For any ω, the parameter space Bellman operator for the upper-level problem Fω′ =



                                                             67
Φ† ◦ Fω ◦ Φ is a γ ′ -contraction with respect to a norm ∥ · ∥Φ on RM defined by ∥β∥Φ = ∥Φβ∥∞ , i.e.,


                                   Fω′ (β) − Fω′ (β ′ ) Φ ≤ κγ T β − β ′ Φ ,


where β, β ′ ∈ RM . Therefore, there exists a fixed point β ∗ of Fω′ .

Proof. The proof follows Theorem 3a of Tsitsiklis and Van Roy (1996). We include the steps here

in our notation for completeness:


                   Fω′ (β) − Fω′ (β ′ ) Φ = (Φ† ◦ Fω ◦ Φ)(β) − (Φ† ◦ Fω ◦ Φ)(β ′ ) Φ

                                        = Φ(Φ† ◦ Fω ◦ Φ)(β) − Φ(Φ† ◦ Fω ◦ Φ)(β ′ ) ∞

                                        ≤ κ Fω (Φβ) − Fω (Φβ ′ ) ∞

                                        ≤ κγ T Φβ − Φβ ′ ∞

                                        = κγ T β − β ′ Φ ,


where first inequality follows by Lemma G.1 and the second inequality follows by the γ T -contraction

property of Fω .

Lemma G.6. Let ω ∗ be the solution of the lower level of FSAVI and let β ∗ be the fixed point of

Fω′ ∗ . The approximate value iteration of the upper level of FSAVI, which produces βk , has a “value

iteration” error of:

                                                               κ2 − κ2 (κγ)T +1
                          V̂ (βk ) − V̂ (β ∗ ) ∞ ≤ (κγ T )k                       rmax .
                                                              (1 − κγ T )(1 − κγ)

Proof. We have:


                          V̂ (βk ) − V̂ (β ∗ ) ∞ = ΦFω′ ∗ βk−1 − ΦFω′ ∗ β ∗ ∞

                                                = Fω′ ∗ βk−1 − Fω′ ∗ β ∗ Φ

                                                ≤ κγ T Φβk−1 − Φβ ∗ ∞

                                                ≤ κγ T V̂ (βk−1 ) − V̂ (β ∗ ) ∞

                                                ≤ (κγ T )k V̂ (β0 ) − V̂ (β ∗ ) ∞


                                                      68
                                                             κ2 − κ2 (κγ)T +1
                                               ≤ (κγ T )k                       rmax .
                                                            (1 − κγ T )(1 − κγ)

The first inequality is by Lemma G.5 and the last inequality follows from β0 = 0 and Lemma

G.4.

Lemma G.7. Consider any ω. If β ∗ is the fixed point of Fω′ , i.e., β ∗ = Fω′ β ∗ , which exists by

Lemma G.5, then it holds that

                                                                        
                                                               1+κ
                                    Vω∗ − V̂ (β ∗ ) ∞ ≤                      εup
                                                              1 − κγ T

where Vω∗ is the fixed point of Fω .

Proof. Let ε′ = εup + δ for some δ > 0. Choose β̄ ∈ RM such that Vω∗ − V̂ (β̄) ∞ < ε′ . Then,


                    V̂ (β̄) − ΦFω′ (β̄) ∞ = Φβ̄ − ΦΦ† Fω V̂ (β̄) ∞

                                          = ΦΦ† Φβ̄ − ΦΦ† Fω V̂ (β̄) ∞

                                          < κ Φβ̄ − Fω V̂ (β̄) ∞                                (44)

                                          = κ V̂ (β̄) − Fω V̂ (β̄) ∞
                                                                                  
                                          ≤ κ V̂ (β̄) − Vω∗ ∞ + Vω∗ − Fω V̂ (β̄) ∞
                                                                        
                                          < κ ε′ + Fω Vω∗ − Fω V̂ (β̄) ∞

                                          < κ ε′ + γ T ϵ ′ = κ 1 + γ T ε′ ,                     (45)
                                                                     



where (44) is by Lemma G.1 and (45) is by the γ T -contraction property of Fω . Now, we let

ε′′ = κ(1 + γ T ) ε′ and see that


                  V̂ (β̄) − V̂ (β ∗ ) ∞ ≤ V̂ (β̄) − ΦFω′ (β̄) ∞ + ΦFω′ (β̄) − V̂ (β ∗ ) ∞

                                       < ϵ′′ + ΦΦ† Fω V̂ (β̄) − ΦΦ† Fω V̂ (β ∗ ) ∞

                                       < ϵ′′ + κ Fω V̂ (β̄) − Fω V̂ (β ∗ ) ∞

                                       ≤ ϵ′′ + κγ T V̂ (β̄) − V̂ (β ∗ ) ∞ .




                                                     69
It thus follows that
                                                                       κ + κγ T ′
                                             V̂ (β̄) − V̂ (β ∗ ) ∞ ≤            ε.
                                                                       1 − κγ T

Putting the pieces together, we have


                           Vω∗ − V̂ (β ∗ ) ∞ ≤ Vω∗ − V̂ (β̄) ∞ + ∥V̂ (β̄) − V̂ (β ∗ ) ∞
                                                       κ + κγ T ′
                                                 ≤ ε′ +         ε
                                                       1 − κγ T
                                                    1+κ ′
                                                 ≤          ε.
                                                   1 − κγ T

Since δ can be arbitrarily small, the proof is complete.


G.2      Proof of Theorem C.1

We apply Lemma 6.1 with π = π̂ω∗ , J1 = Jˆ1 (ω ∗ ), and V = V̂ (βk ). First, to compute the reward

error ϵr (π ∗ , Jˆ1 (ω1∗ )), we have


             ϵr (π ∗ , Jˆ1 (ω1∗ )) = max E[R(s, a, π ∗ )] − E[R̃(s, a, Jˆ1 (ω1∗ ))]
                                       s,a

                                ≤ ϵr (γ, α, dY , L, T ) + max E[R̃(s, a, J1∗ )] − E[R̃(s, a, Jˆ1 (ω1∗ ))]
                                                             s,a

                                ≤ ϵr (γ, α, dY , L, T ) + γ J1∗ − Jˆ1 (ω1∗ ) ∞
                                                                        T
                                                                         X −1      
                                                                               ′ i
                                ≤ ϵr (γ, α, dY , L, T ) + γ + (γ + 1)        (γ ) εlow ,
                                                                             i=1


where the last inequality follows from Lemma G.3. The other term to analyze is Vω∗∗ − V̂ (βk ) ∞ ,

where we remind the reader of our usage of the shorthand notation Vω∗∗ = V ∗ (Jˆ1 (ω ∗ ), π̂ω∗ ):


                 Vω∗∗ − V̂ (β ∗ ) ∞ ≤ Vω∗∗ − V̂ (β ∗ ) ∞ + V̂ (β ∗ ) − V̂ (βk ) ∞
                                                                 2
                                                                     κ − κ2 (κγ)T +1
                                                                                      
                                         1+κ                T k
                                    ≤              εup + (κγ )                           rmax ,
                                        1 − κγ T                    (1 − κγ T )(1 − κγ)

which follows by Lemmas G.4 and G.6. This completes the proof.




                                                             70
