 SS symmetry
Article
Transition Based Discount Factor for Model Free Algorithms in
Reinforcement Learning
Abhinav Sharma 1 , Ruchir Gupta 2, *, K. Lakshmanan 3 and Atul Gupta 1

                                          1   Department of Computer Science, PDPM Indian Institute of Information Technology Jabalpur,
                                              Madhya Pradesh 482005, India; abhinavsharma@iiitdmj.ac.in (A.S.); atul@iiitdmj.ac.in (A.G.)
                                          2   Department of Computer Science, JNU, Delhi 110001, India
                                          3   Department of Computer Science, IIT (BHU) Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh 221005, India;
                                              lakshmanank.cse@iitbhu.ac.in
                                          *   Correspondence: rgupta.cse@iitbhu.ac.in


                                          Abstract: Reinforcement Learning (RL) enables an agent to learn control policies for achieving its
                                          long-term goals. One key parameter of RL algorithms is a discount factor that scales down future cost
                                          in the state’s current value estimate. This study introduces and analyses a transition-based discount
                                          factor in two model-free reinforcement learning algorithms: Q-learning and SARSA, and shows their
                                          convergence using the theory of stochastic approximation for finite state and action spaces. This
                                          causes an asymmetric discounting, favouring some transitions over others, which allows (1) faster
                                          convergence than constant discount factor variant of these algorithms, which is demonstrated by
                                          experiments on the Taxi domain and MountainCar environments; (2) provides better control over the
                                          RL agents to learn risk-averse or risk-taking policy, as demonstrated in a Cliff Walking experiment.


         
                                          Keywords: model free algorithms; Q-learning; reinforcement learning; SARSA; transition dependent
                                   discount factor
Citation: Sharma, A.; Gupta, R.;
Lakshmanan, K.; Gupta, A. Transition
Based Discount Factor for Model Free
Algorithms in Reinforcement
                                          1. Introduction
Learning. Symmetry 2021, 13, 1197.              RL algorithms train a software agent to determine a policy, which can solve an RL
https://doi.org/10.3390/sym13071197       problem in the most efficient way possible. Such a policy is termed an optimal policy.
                                          The problem is considered solved when the RL agent achieves its desired goal, which
Academic Editor: Basil Papadopoulos       varies as per the problem [1]. An RL agent’s objective is generally to minimize its expected
                                          long-term costs (or maximize its expected long-term rewards) of problems that can be
Received: 22 April 2021                   categorized as episodic and non-episodic depending upon whether a set of goal states
Accepted: 11 May 2021
                                          exists. Episodic tasks have at least one winning state, such as games like Atari and Chess.
Published: 2 July 2021
                                          An agent maintaining a power plant’s critical temperature is an example of non-episodic RL
                                          problems as there is no fixed goal state [2]. Algorithms solving RL problems have potential
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
                                          applications in various domains like games [3,4], robotics [5,6], wireless networks [7,8],
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
                                          self-driving cars [9–11]. Two such examples are shown in Figures 1 and 2.
published maps and institutional affil-
                                                Many RL algorithms like Q-learning [12], SARSA [13], and Deep Q-learning [14]
iations.
                                          use a scaling parameter called the discount factor. This parameter exponentially scales
                                          down the effect of future costs in the current estimate of the value of a state [15]. This
                                          scaling makes the RL algorithms mathematically tractable in case of infinite horizon prob-
                                          lems [16]. For the sake of simplicity, in most applications, the discount factor is generally
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.         assumed as constant [17]. However, Vincent et al. [18] show that increasing the discount
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
                                          factor, as the training progresses, may result in faster convergence in Atari Games. Later,
This article is an open access article
                                          Edwards et al. [19] show that adjusting the discount factors can be used for reward engineer-
distributed under the terms and
                                          ing, which prevents the agent from being stuck in Positive or Negative Reward Hallways
conditions of the Creative Commons
                                          (reward loops). These results garner our attention to non-constant discount factors.
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
                                                One possible way to construct a non-constant discount factor is to take it as a function
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
                                          of iterations itself [20]. Some studies show that a discount factor as a function makes more
4.0/).




Symmetry 2021, 13, 1197. https://doi.org/10.3390/sym13071197                                              https://www.mdpi.com/journal/symmetry
Symmetry 2021, 13, 1197                                                                                          2 of 16




                          sense than a constant discount factor in specific settings [21]. For example, incorporating
                          a state-dependent discount factor is a natural setting to model interest rates in financial
                          systems [22]. This use case is based on intuitions from studies on animals. It is common
                          to observe animals show delaying and impulsive behaviour in different tasks [23] which
                          might be because of discounting they use in their brain neurons depending upon the
                          situations [24].




                          Figure 1. RL agents beats human benchmark in Atari Games [25].




                          Figure 2. RL agent as controller for autonomous traffic control system [26].

                               In RL algorithms, contrary to the general belief of choosing a discount factor value
                          close to one, Tutsoy et al. [27] show that the discount factor should be chosen proportional
                          to the inverse of the dominant pole. In other work [28], the author considers the role
                          of the discount factor on both learning and control in a model-free approach. It was
                          suggested by Pitis [20] that the discount factor can exceed one for some transitions if the
                          overall discount is less than one so that the returns are bounded. Hence, the discount
                          factors do not need to be equal for all transitions. Optimality has been studied in Markov
                          Decision Processes (MDP) for unbounded costs using state-dependent discount factor [22]
                          and randomized discount factor [29]. Inspired by Wei [22], Yoshida gave the convergence
                          results of the Q-learning algorithm for the state-dependent discount factor [30]. These
                          studies directly investigate a discount factor’s role for various cases by using both a test
                          problem approach and a general function approximation case. Recently, a state-dependent
                          discount factor model is introduced for infinite horizon case [31]. Other studies utilize
                          state or transition dependent discount factors for better control over the RL agents [31–34].
                          This work establishes that the asymmetric discounting of Q-values in a systematic way
                          results in more robust and efficient learning by RL agents. However, breakthrough work in
                          discount factor as a function is done by White [35].
                               White gave a framework in which the author discussed the use of transition based
                          discounting, that is, a discount factor which is a function of the current state, action,
Symmetry 2021, 13, 1197                                                                                               3 of 16




                          and next state, and proved contraction for generalized Bellman operator [35]. White
                          demonstrated that both non-episodic and episodic tasks could be specified with the help of
                          a transition-based discount. Hence, there is a benefit of using transition-based discount
                          over constant one as the former provides a general unified theory for both episodic and non-
                          episodic tasks. This setting of the discount factor has not been studied yet for Q-learning
                          and SARSA algorithms.
                               The novelty of our work is the introduction of discount factor as a function of tran-
                          sition variables (current state, action and next state) to the two model-free reinforcement
                          learning algorithms mentioned above and provide convergence results for the same. Exper-
                          imental results show improvement in the performance of algorithms after using transition
                          dependent discount factor. We have also provided a way to set the discount factor, which
                          can be used in tasks where there are finite state and action spaces, and a positive reward
                          is provided at the goal state. This is fundamentally different from White’s work which
                          proposed to bridge the gap between episodic and non-episodic tasks. In addition, we
                          propose an application of transition dependent discounting to learn risk-averse policies
                          that can prevent frequent high-cost actions by an agent.
                               Our main contributions are as follows:
                          1.   Introduction of transition based discounts in Q-Learning and SARSA algorithms.
                          2.   Demonstration of optimal policies in these algorithms with the proposed discount
                               factor setting using stochastic approximation theory to present a generalized result
                               for the convergence of these algorithms.
                          3.   Comparison of transition based discount factor with the constant discount factor in
                               Q-learning and SARSA on simulated Taxi domain, MountainCar and cliff-walking en-
                               vironments.
                               The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes Q-learning and
                          SARSA algorithms. Section 3 introduces the proposed model and Section 4 explains the
                          algorithms and their convergence. Section 5 provides the experimental results against other
                          algorithms. Conclusions are drawn in Section 6.

                          2. Background
                                 RL algorithms’ objective is to find a mapping for all possible states to actions (also
                          known as policy) that minimizes the agent’s long-term cost in an environment. Reinforce-
                          ment Learning problems are often modelled as Markov Decision Process (MDP), which
                          is a tuple < S, U, T, c, β >. Here, S is a set of finite states on which an MDP is defined,
                          U (i ) is a finite set of all the possible control actions associated with a state i ∈ S. T is the
                          transition probability matrix, ciu ∈ R is the cost associated with action u in-state i with
                          finite variance and β is the discount parameter. We have considered the sets S and U to be
                          finite sets. The algorithms discussed are model-free, that is, the class of algorithms which
                          do not require model (state transition probabilities) of the environment. In both SARSA
                          and Q-learning algorithms, agents generally follow some Greedy in Limit with Infinite
                          Exploration (GLIE) policy (such as e-greedy in which each action is taken greedily with
                          probability 1 − e and randomly otherwise). This policy explores the environment and
                          iteratively calculates its estimate of the Q values for possible state-action pairs.
                                 Q-learning and SARSA try to find an optimum policy π ∗ , which, if followed, mini-
                          mizes the total expected cost. This is achieved by defining an action-value function Qiu      π (t)

                          which denotes total expected discounted cost at time t after taking action u in-state i and
                          following policy π thereafter. Under the influence of π ∗ the action value function gives an
                          optimal value Qiu   π ∗ which is unique in an MDP and independent of t for a given (i, u).

                                                                    ∗         π
                                                                   Qiu = min Qiu .                                       (1)
                                                                          π ∈Π

                                                                                                            ∗
                                                                                                   π as simply Q∗ .
                               As we are not looking for any particular optimal policy, we denote Qiu
                                                            π
                          For convenience, we denote Qiu (t) as Qiu (t). Let Q-values are stored in a lookup table
                          and all state-action pairs are visited infinitely often.
Symmetry 2021, 13, 1197                                                                                              4 of 16




                          2.1. Q-Learning
                                Q-learning algorithm [12] iteratively updates the action-value function or Q-function
                          (Qiu (t)) which takes state and action as arguments. The algorithm starts with a random
                          table of Q-values for each state-action pair and follows a GLIE policy to choose action.
                          Every action causes a transition from state i to next state u and returns a cost ciu . This
                          cost and the Q-value of the most optimal next state-action pair are used to calculate an
                          estimate. This estimate is then used to update the Q-value of the present state-action pair.
                          The update equation for Q-learning algorithms is given by
                                                                                                      
                                            Qiu (t + 1) = Qiu (t)+αi (t) ciu − Qiu (t) + β min Q jv (t) .               (2)
                                                                                          v ∈U ( j )

                               Here, αi (t) ∈ (0, 1) is the step size parameter, j ∈ S(i, u) is a successor state in which
                          the agent arrives after taking action u in-state i. β ∈ [0, 1] is a scalar constant discount
                          factor. The algorithm draws all the random samples independently. Note that because
                          the estimate is calculated independent of the GLIE policy, it is termed as off-policy. This
                          process is repeated for every state-action pair. The algorithms converge when the change
                          in values are within some threshold. The theoretical convergence result of this algorithm is
                          given in Tsitsiklis et al. [36] and Jaakkola et al. [37].

                          2.2. SARSA
                                 SARSA, which is State Action Reward State Action for short [38], is an on-policy
                          reinforcement learning algorithm. Here, the estimated return for the state-action pairs is
                          calculated based on the GLIE policy, which the learner is following. This algorithm is very
                          similar to Q-learning except for the way it updates its Q-values. When the agent is in state
                          i, first, it takes action as per the policy it is following (say π) and move to state j ∈ S(i, u).
                          Then, the agent selects action v as per the policy π and update previous states’ Q-value
                          according to this equation:
                                                                                                           
                                                  Qiu (t + 1) = Qiu (t) + αi (t) ciu − Qiu (t) + βQ jv (t).             (3)

                               This step differentiates SARSA from Q-learning. As in Equation (2), the agent chooses
                          the next state with minimum Q-value, which can be different from the actual next state,
                          whereas, in SARSA, only the next states’ Q-value is considered in the update as in Equation (3).
                          The convergence of this algorithm was given by Singh et al. [39].

                          3. Transition Dependent Discount Factor
                                As the name suggests, the parameter discount factor is modelled as function of
                          transition, that is, current state i, action u and next state j. It is denoted by β(i, u, j) such
                          that 0 ≤ β(i, u, j) < 1 ∀ i, u, j, β(i, u, j) : S × U × S → R. Hence, different transitions
                          can have different discount factor values. This allows the emphasis of costs from certain
                          transitions and the suppression of others. It can benefit training by avoiding reward loops,
                          much like reward shaping [19]. It is assumed that the values of β(i, u, j) are stored in a
                          finite length table.
                                Now with transition dependent discount factor, the update rule for Q-learning is
                          given by:
                                                                                                            
                                       Qiu (t + 1) = Qiu (t) + αi (t) ciu − Qiu (t) + β(i, u, j) min Q jv (t) .         (4)
                                                                                                  v ∈U ( j )

                              Similarly, the update equation for SARSA with transition dependent discount is
                          given by:                                                                       
                                         Qiu (t + 1) = Qiu (t) + αi (t) ciu − Qiu (t) + β(i, u, j) Q jv (t) . (5)
                               The Q-learning and SARSA algorithms with the transition dependent discount factor
                          are shown in Algorithms 1 and 2, respectively. Flowcharts of the algorithms are given in
                          Figure 3.
Symmetry 2021, 13, 1197                                                                                                      5 of 16




                  (a) QL-TDD Algorithm                                          (b) SARSA-TDD Algorithm

                                         Figure 3. Flowchart of the proposed algorithms.


Algorithm 1 Q-Learning with transition dependent discount
 1: procedure Q-L EARNING WITH TRANSITION DEPENDENT DISCOUNT
 2:    for each state i ∈ S and action u ∈ A do
 3:        Initialize Qiu randomly.
 4:     t←0
 5:     for each episode do
 6:         Initialize i.
 7:         for each step of episode do
 8:             Choose action u at state i using a ε-greedy policy.
 9:             Take action u, observe cost ciu and next state i0 .
10:             Update Qiu (t)

                                           Qiu (t) ← Qiu (t − 1) + α[ciu − Qiu (t − 1)
                                                                 + β(i, u, i0 ) min
                                                                                 0
                                                                                    Qi0 u0 (t − 1)]
                                                                                u

11:              i ← i0

                                Intuition behind Transition Dependent Discount Factor
                                      To understand the intuition of transition dependent discount factor, consider the
                                following finite-state episodic scenario.
                                      Let s1 be the start state and st be the terminal state with many states in between them.
                                Let each transition results in a cost of one unit except for transition to terminal state, which
                                results in a cost of −1 unit. Consider the last two transitions in path from s1 to st . Let Φ be
                                the set of states which are neighbors of terminal state st and Θ be the set of states which
                                are neighbors to the states of set Φ but not with st . Thus if an agent goes from state s1 to st ,
                                the last two visited states are from set Θ and Φ respectively. Note that, the case where last
                                two states are from set Φ does not add value here and does not contradict later arguments.
                                Assume that the states si , s j be in set Θ and sk , sl belongs to set Φ and R is an action required
                                for transition from left to right in Figure 4. Let the discount factor for each transition is β,
                                except for those transitions from states in Θ to states in Φ which are caused by the action R.
                                In those transitions, the discount factor value is β + ζ, where ζ ∈ [0, 1]. Then, the Q-value
Symmetry 2021, 13, 1197                                                                                                                6 of 16




                                    update for the transition from si to sk by action R with transition dependent discount factor
                                    β(si , R, sk ) = β + ζ is given by:
                                                                             h                                                     i
                                              Qsi ,R (t + 1) = Qsi ,R (t) + α csi ,sk − Qsi ,R (t) + β(si , R, sk ) min Qsk ,v (t)        (6)
                                                                                                                    v ∈U ( s k )


Algorithm 2 SARSA with transition dependent discount
 1: procedure SARSA WITH TRANSITION DEPENDENT DISCOUNT
 2:     for each state i ∈ S and action u ∈ A do
 3:         Initialize Qiu randomly.
 4:         Initialize β(i, u, i0 ) with β 0 .
 5:     t←0
 6:     for each episode do
 7:         Initialize i.
 8:         Select a random action u valid state i.
 9:         for each step of episode do
10:             Take action u, observe cost ciu and next state i0 .
11:             Choose action u0 valid in state i0 using a ε-greedy policy.
12:             For Qiu (t)

                                                Qiu (t) ← Qiu (t − 1)+α[ciu − Qiu (t − 1)
                                                                           + β(i, u, i0 ) Qi0 u0 (t − 1)]

13:              i ← i 0 ; u ← u0


                                         Now, for a vanilla Q-learning algorithm, this update would use a constant discount β
                                    in place of β(si , R, sk ), that is:
                                                                                  h                                       i
                                                   Qsi ,R (t + 1) = Qsi ,R (t) + α csi ,sk − Qsi ,R (t) + β min Qsk ,v (t) .              (7)
                                                                                                            v ∈U ( s k )

                                          Similarly, transitions from Θ to Φ with action R involving si , s j , sk and sl follow
                                    similar update rules for transition dependent discounting and and vanilla Q-learning as
                                    in Equations (6) and (7). Remaining all other transitions update Q-values using discount
                                    factor β.
                                          It is clear that as β(si , R, sk ) ≥ β, hence, the Q-value in Equation (6) is less than or
                                    equal to the Q-value in Equation (7) (as final cost is negative). Thus, it propagates a lower
                                    Q value to previous states in later iterations. Therefore, the updates propagate at a faster
                                    rate leading to a shorter learning duration. This argument is valid for all transitions from
                                    state set Θ to state set Φ which are due to action R.
                                          Hence, the use of a transition dependent discount factor eventually reduces training
                                    time. Similar arguments can be given for SARSA with transition-based discounting.




                                    Figure 4. Simplistic state transition diagram.
Symmetry 2021, 13, 1197                                                                                                       7 of 16




                          4. Convergence of Algorithms
                                Let < S, U, T, c, β > be the MDP under consideration. Let t be a non-negative integer
                          denoting time. The mapping from state to action is denoted by policy π such that π ∈ Π
                          where Π is the set of all policies and action U (i ) = π (i ) ∀ i ∈ S. It is assumed that every
                          action is taken by following some policy. We have defined discount factor as, β(i, u, j),
                          satisfying the assumption that 0 ≤ β(i, u, j) < 1, ∀ i, j ∈ S, u ∈ U (i ). As long as this
                          assumption is satisfied, our analysis shows that discount factor can be any function.
                                Let P = {(i, u)|i ∈ S, u ∈ U (i )} be the set of all possible state-action pairs and let N be
                          its cardinality(finite). Let, (Ω, F , Pr ) be the probability space on which Qiu (t), αi (t), wiu (t)
                          are defined as random variables and F (t) to be an increasing sequence of σ - fields which
                          represents the history of algorithm till time t.
                                On successful completion of both Q-learning and SARSA, the Q values approach Q∗
                          for all state-action pairs, and the algorithm is said to converge to optimal. Next, we will
                          present the formal proof for the convergence of these algorithms.

                          4.1. Q-Learning with Transition-Based Discounts
                               In Q-learning, instead of using a constant discount factor during Q-values update,
                          a transition-based discount factor is used, which is maintained in a table as mentioned
                          above. With β(i, u, j) ∈ [0, 1), the update equation of Q-learning (Equation (2)) can be
                          re-written as                                        
                                                 Qiu (t + 1) = Qiu (t) + αi (t) ciu − Qiu (t)
                                                                                                 
                                                                       + β(i, u, j) min Q jv (t)
                                                                                                  v ∈U ( j )

                               Let Fiu be the expected cost of a state i which is optimal after action u. We define F to
                          be the mapping from Rn into itself. Its component Fiu is given by
                                                                                            
                                                   Fiu ( Q) = E[ciu ] + E β(i, u, j) min Q jv .                      (8)
                                                                                                  v ∈U ( j )

                               Here, the expectations are w.r.t. action u. Re-writing Equation (8) using Equation (8) gives:

                                            Qiu (t + 1) = Qiu (t) + αiu (t)[ Fiu ( Q(t)) − Qiu (t) + wiu (t)],                   (9)

                          where                                                                    
                                                   wiu (t) =ciu − E β(i, u, j) min Q jv (t) | F (t)
                                                                                     v ∈U ( j )

                                                               + β(i, u, j) min Q jv (t) − E[ciu ]
                                                                            v ∈U ( j )

                               After defining everything necessary about Q-learning with the adaptive discount
                          factor, we now present the convergence of this algorithm.
                               Consider the following result of stochastic approximation equation from Tsitsiklis et al. [36]:

                          Theorem 1. Let xi (t), wi (t), αi (t) are random variables defined on the probability space (ω, F, P )
                          which satisfies this iterative equation:

                                                 xi (t + 1) = xi (t) + αi (t)( Fi ( xi (t)) − xi (t) + wi (t)).                 (10)

                               Then, if following assumptions I, II and III hold, then x (t) will converge to x ∗ with probability 1.

                               Assumption I. Consider the following:
                          1.    x (0) is F (0)-measurable;
                          2.    wi (t) is F (t + 1)-measurable.
                          3.    αi (t) is F (t)-measurable for every i, t.
                          4.    We have E[wi (t)|F (t)] = 0 for every i and t.
Symmetry 2021, 13, 1197                                                                                                    8 of 16




                          5.    There exist (deterministic) constants A and B ∀ i, t such that

                                                         E[wi2 (t)|F (t)] ≤ A + B max max | x j (τ )|2 .
                                                                                              j   τ ≤t

                          Assumption II.
                          1.    For every i with probability 1,
                                                                        ∞
                                                                        ∑ αi (t) = ∞,
                                                                        t =0

                          2.    There exists some (deterministic) constant C such that for every i with probability 1,
                                                                         ∞
                                                                        ∑ α2i (t) ≤ C,
                                                                        t =0

                          Assumption III. There exists a vector x ∗ ∈ Rn , a positive vector v, and a scalar β ∈ [0, 1), such that

                                                     k F ( x ) − x ∗ kv ≤ βk x − x ∗ kv             ∀ x ∈ Rn                 (11)

                          for some vector v where all elements are equal to 1.

                               Next, we satisfy all the assumptions of Lemma 1 on Q-learning with a transition based
                          discount factor to prove its convergence.
                               It can be noted that Equation (9) has the same form as Equation (10).

                          Proof. Before we begin, for the sake of simplicity, we assume that v in assumption (III) is
                          a vector of ones. This assumption is valid as we can get it from coordinate scaling of any
                          general positive weight vector. We now discuss each assumption one by one in Q-learning
                          with transition dependent discount factor setting:
                                Assumption I: This assumption implies that given the past history, it is possible to
                          update Qiu at time t. As F (t) represents history till time t by definition, hence Qi0 u0 and
                          wiu (t) are F (0)-measurable and F (t + 1)-measurable respectively. Thus part (1) and (2) are
                          satisfied. Part (3) follows from the design of Q-learning as it assumes that the requirement
                          of samples is fulfilled by following a simulated trajectory. Updates is dependent on the
                          decision of agent, as it controls which states to visit. Part (4) is inferred from Equation (10)
                          by taking expectations w.r.t. action u on both sides, thus canceling out everything. For
                          Part (5), consider the variance of wiu (t) which is given by:

                                                      Var (wiu (t)) = E[(wiu (t))2 ] − [E[wiu (t)]]2
                                                                                                                             (12)
                                                                     = E[wiu (t)2 ].

                               So if we take variance of Equation (10):
                                                                    "
                                              Var [wiu (t)] = Var ciu − E[ciu ] + β(i, u, j) min Q jv (t)
                                                                                                         v ∈U ( j )
                                                                                                    #                      (13)
                                                               − E β(i, u, j) min Q jv (t)                .
                                                                                 v ∈U ( j )


                              Using Equation (12) and the property of expectations that Var [E( X )] = 0 for some
                          random variable X, we can write the above equation as
                                                    2
                                                 E[wiu (t)] = Var [ciu ] + Var [ β(i, u, j) min Q jv (t)]
                                                                                                  v ∈U ( j )
                                                                                                                             (14)
                                                             ≤ Var [ciu ] +       max         Q2jv (t).
                                                                               j∈S,u∈U ( j)
Symmetry 2021, 13, 1197                                                                                                       9 of 16




                              It, therefore, satisfies part (5).
                              Assumption II: This assumption for the step-size parameter is standard for stochastic
                          approximation algorithms. It ensures that all state-action pairs to be visited an infinite
                          number of times.
                              Assumption III: From Equation (8) we have
                                                                                              
                                                     Fiu ( Q) = E[ciu ] + E β(i, u, j) min Q jv .               (15)
                                                                                             v ∈U ( j )

                               Let the Q value of this state-action pair be Q0 when it is revisited. Then we will have:
                                                                                               
                                                  Fiu ( Q0 ) = E[ciu ] + E β(i, u, j) min Q0 j,v .                 (16)
                                                                                            v ∈U ( j )

                               From Equations (15) and (16).
                                                                                                               
                                                                     0
                                                   | Fiu ( Q)− Fiu ( Q )| = E β(i, u, j) min Q jv
                                                                                              v ∈U ( j )
                                                                                                                   
                                                                            − E β(i, u, j) min Q0 j,v
                                                                                               v ∈U ( j )
                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                            0                   (17)
                                                            = E β(i, u, j) min Q jv − min Q j,v
                                                                           v ∈U ( j )    v ∈U ( j )
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                    0
                                                            ≤ E β(i, u, j) max Qk,v − Q k,v
                                                                          k ∈S,v∈U (k )
                                                               ∗
                                                                              Qk,v − Q0 k,v ,
                                                                                            
                                                            ≤β    max
                                                                  k ∈S,v∈U (k )

                          where β∗ = maxk∈S,v∈U (k) β(i, v, k). This satisfies assumption III. Therefore our model also
                          follows Lemma 1 and establishes convergence.

                          4.2. Sarsa with Transition-Based Discounts
                               The update equation with transition-based discount factor is given by:
                                                                                              
                                       Qiu (t + 1) = αi (t) ciu + β(i, u, j) Q jv (t) − Qiu (t) + Qiu (t).                      (18)

                                To prove the convergence of SARSA with transition-based discounts, we use the
                          convergence result of SARSA [39] under GLIE policy. In GLIE, the probability of choosing
                          a non-greedy action decreases over time, for example, e-greedy policy. Other assumptions,
                          like finite states and actions (for lookup table representation) and unlimited visits to all state-
                          action pairs, are similar to Q-learning. Consider the following lemma from Singh et al. [39]:

                          Lemma 1. For any random iterative process (∆(t), α(t), F (t)) , t ≥ 0, such that ∆(t), α(t), F (t −
                          1) are F (t) measurable, α(0), ∆(0) are F (0)-measurable and (∆(t), α(t), F (t) : X → R satisfies:

                                                      ∆ x (t + 1) = (1 − α x (t))∆ x (t) + α x (t) Fx (t)
                                                                                      x ∈ X, t = 0, 1, 2...

                               Then ∆(t) converge to zero w.p.1 if the following assumptions hold:
                          1.    the set X is finite.
                          2.    0 ≤ α x (t) ≤ 1, ∑t α x (t) = ∞, ∑t α2x (t) ≤ ∞ w.p.1.
                          3.    kE{ Fx (t)|F (t)}kw ≤ κ k∆(t)kw + ct where κ ∈ [0, 1) and ct converge to zero w.p.1.
                          4.    Var{ Fx (t)|F (t)} ≤ K (1 + k∆(t)kw )2 where K is some constant.
                               Here F (t) is an increasing sequence of σ-fields that includes the past of the process. αt , ∆t , Ft−1 ∈
                          F (t). The notation k.kw refers to some fixed maximum norm.
Symmetry 2021, 13, 1197                                                                                                    10 of 16




                          Proof. For assumption 1, set X corresponds to the set of state S, which is assumed to
                          be finite; thus, this assumption is satisfied. The second assumption is for the step size
                          parameter for stochastic approximation algorithms and is the same as assumption II of
                          Q-learning. In this lemma, ∆ x (t) corresponds to Qiu (t) − Q∗ as x corresponds to pair of
                          state i ∈ S and action u ∈ U. With this, the stochastic iterative process can be re-written as:

                                                  ∆iu (t + 1) = (1 − αiu (t))∆iu (t) + αiu (t) Fiu (t),                       (19)

                          where Fiu (t) is given by:
                                                                                            
                                                                                          ∗
                                               Fiu (t) = ciu + β(i, u, j) min Q jw (t) − Qiu
                                                                          w ∈U ( i )
                                                                                                          
                                                         + β(i, u, j) Q jv (t) − β(i, u, j) min Q jw (t)                      (20)
                                                                                           w ∈U ( i )
                                                           Q
                                                       = Fiu + C ( t ),
                                     Q                                             ∗ and C ( t )
                          where Fiu      = ciu + β(i, u, j) minw∈U (i) Q jw (t) − Qiu                     =    β(i, u, j) Q jv (t)−
                          β(i, u, j) minw∈U (i) Q jw (t). Now taking expectations both sides:

                                                                                Q
                                                             E[ Fiu (t)] = E[ Fiu ] + E[C (t)].                               (21)

                                               Q
                                Note that E[ Fiu ] looks similar to the left-hand side of the Equation (15) in assumption
                          III of Q-learning. Both Q-learning and SARSA are very similar algorithms, with the only
                          difference being how the action values are updated in both. Where the update in Q-
                          values of Q-learning follows off-policy, SARSA updates are on-policy. So assumption III of
                          Q-learning is valid here too. Hence,
                                                    Q
                                              kE( Fiu )kw ≤ β∗ k∆iu (t)kw ∀i ∈ S, u ∈ U (s), β∗ ∈ [0, 1).                     (22)

                              Thus stating the contraction mapping. Note that C (t) differentiates Fiu (t) from SARSA
                                 Q
                          with Fiu (t) of Q-learning. Now using this information,

                                                       kE[ Fiu (t)]kw ≤ k β∗ ∆iu (t)kw + E[C (t)]                             (23)

                                This looks similar to the third property of Lemma 1, with the only remaining thing
                          to show is E[C (t)] converge to zero with probability 1. Now, as the MDP under consider-
                          ation is finite, and policy is GLIE, eventually for the state j, action u = min j U ( j) hence
                          β(i, u, j) → β∗ . Rest of the arguments relating to the boundedness of Qiu (t) are same
                          as Singh et al. [39]. The Q values of the Q-learning algorithm, which updates the same
                          set of state-action pairs, in the same order as SARSA and using min in update equation
                          will bound the Q values of SARSA from below (similarly max will bound from above).
                          Furthermore, due to the similarities with the Q-learning algorithm, Q values of SARSA
                          are also bounded in the same way as the Q values of Q-learning. Similar arguments are
                          there for the boundedness of variance of Fiu (t), thus satisfying lemma’s third and fourth
                          assumptions.

                              The convergence proof for SARSA can be concluded by using the following theorem
                          from Singh et al. [39].

                          Theorem 2. Consider a finite state-action MDP and fix a GLIE learning policy π. Assume that ut
                          is chosen according to π and at time step t, π uses Q = Qt , where the Qt values are computed by
                          the SARSA (0) rule. Then Qt converge to Q∗ and the learning policy πt converge to an optimal
                          policy π ∗ provided that the conditions on the immediate costs, state transitions and learning rates
                          mentioned in Section 2 and Lemma 1 hold and if the following additional conditions are satisfied:
                          1.   The Q values are stored in a lookup table.
Symmetry 2021, 13, 1197                                                                                            11 of 16




                          2.   Var [ciu ] < ∞.

                          Proof. All the necessary arguments have already been discussed in the lemma 1, hence the
                          proof directly follows from [39].

                          5. Experiments
                                 To demonstrate transition based discounting in Q-learning and SARSA, we performed
                          experiments with a standard taxi domain, mountain car, and cliff walking environment.
                                 Transition dependent discount factor for taxi domain and mountain car environments
                          are constructed in the following way. Every transition to the state, which results in a
                          positive cost, will have slightly more discount factor value than remaining transitions.
                          For these two experiments, we increased the value of those transitions by 0.15, and all
                          other transitions have a discount value of 0.8. For these values, the algorithms performed
                          optimally. We found algorithms with constant discount performs best when the discount
                          factor’s value is 0.99. For another parameter learning rate, the value assigned is 1/tω . Here,
                          t is the iteration number and ω ∈ [0.5, 1] is a constant. The value of ω is chosen heuristically
                          as 0.7.

                          5.1. Taxi Domain
                                We have considered the Taxi domain environment as given by Dietterich [40]. It is a
                          5 × 5 grid (Figure 5) where the agent (taxi) is allowed to perform six actions, viz. go up,
                          left, right, down, perform pickup, and drops. We have used the original version of this
                          problem, which has four coloured grids, as mentioned in Figure 5. However, the results are
                          comparable even after changing the positions of these coloured grids.




                          Figure 5. A 5 × 5 grid of Taxi domain environment.

                               In this problem, a passenger is waiting in a grid cell to reach a specific destination cell.
                          The goal is to train a taxi agent that can locate a passenger, perform a pickup operation,
                          navigate to the destination cell and perform drop passenger action there in the least
                          amount of time possible. Passenger’s pickup and drop locations are initialized randomly
                          among these coloured blocks when an episode begins. The taxi agent is initialized on any
                          random grid.
                               Each step results in a cost of 1 unit, successful pickup and drop-off results in a cost of
                          −20 units (or reward of 20). There are three walls within the grid which is marked as bold
                          vertical lines between columns (0, 1), (1, 2) and (2, 3). Besides, the boundary cells have
                          walls that prevent the agent from going overboard. Bumping into the walls does not move
                          the agent but induce a penalty of 1 unit (or reward of −1). After initialization, the agent
                          must find the passenger and move towards it using up/down/left/right actions. Then,
Symmetry 2021, 13, 1197                                                                                         12 of 16




                          the agent has to perform a pickup action. A successful pickup costs −20 units, whereas an
                          unsuccessful pickup costs 10 units. The problem is considered solved when the average
                          cost of more than −7. is achieved from 100 consecutive trails.
                               Table 1 shows the number of episodes it took to solve this problem with vanilla
                          Q-learning, SARSA and Expected SARSA compared with Q-learning with transition depen-
                          dent discount (QL-TDD) and SARSA with transition dependent discount (SARSA-TDD).
                          Clearly, the proposed algorithms significantly outperforms the baselines by minimum
                          67 episodes.

                          Table 1. Number of episodes it took for Convergence in Taxi domain environment.

                                              Algorithm                                     Episodes
                                            Q-learning                                     563.2 ± 4.8
                                             SARSA                                         683.1 ± 2.7
                                         Expected SARSA                                    587.5 ± 5.9
                                             QL-TDD                                        481.4 ± 2.1
                                           SARSA-TDD                                       495.6 ± 2.5


                          5.2. Mountain Car
                               In this classic control problem, there is a car in a valley controlled by an RL agent,
                          as shown in Figure 6. The goal is to reach the top marked by a flag. The car is not powerful
                          enough; hence, the agent must move it back and forth to build momentum for pushing the
                          car towards its destination. There are only two actions: left and right. Each action costs
                          one unit till the agent reaches the destination. The state-space here is continuous, so it is
                          discretized by bins to apply the finite-state algorithms mentioned in this paper. Figure 7
                          shows the plot of cumulative rewards obtained versus the number of episodes that favours
                          QL-TDD and SARSA-TDD.




                          Figure 6. Mountain Car environment from OpenAi Gym [41].
Symmetry 2021, 13, 1197                                                                                                 13 of 16




                                                          SARSA
                                               120        EXP-SARSA
                                                          Q-LEARNING
                                                          QL-TDD
                                                          SARSA-TDD
                                               140



                          Cumulative Rewards
                                               160


                                               180


                                               200
                                                     0   2,500 5,000 7,500 10,000 12,500 15,000 17,500 20,000
                                                                           Episodes
                          Figure 7. Expected cumulative rewards for Mountain Car environment.

                          5.3. Cliff Walking
                                We can choose transition dependent discount factors to favour certain policy over
                          others. By carefully choosing the discount factor’s value, agents can be made to learn
                          risk-averse or risk-taking policy. This is demonstrated in the Cliff walking environment
                          Figure 8. Here the goal is to reach destination block (G) from the start block (S) while
                          avoiding cliff. Each step results in a cost of 1 unit. However, the cost is 100 if the agent
                          falls from the cliff and the episode terminates. The agent can take one of the four actions
                          in every grid (up, down, left, right). Reaching destination also terminates episode after
                          returning a cost of one unit. Therefore, in order to maximize the expected return, the agent
                          has to reach the destination block in the least number of steps.




                          Figure 8. A 4 × 12 grid of Cliff walking environment. S and G represents source and Goal respectively.

                                In Q-learning, if all the transitions have same discount (α = 0.99) then the learned
                          optimal path obtained is depicted in Figure 9 in orange-coloured arrow. In this path,
                          a single mistake can result in a cost of 100 units. On the other hand, in Q-learning with
                          transition dependent discount factor, the discount factor values for the transitions from left
                          to right in the light blue coloured region is set to 0.7. This setting makes the path along with
Symmetry 2021, 13, 1197                                                                                                 14 of 16




                          the light blue coloured tiles more favourable due to the increase in Q-values’ value. This
                          new optimal path is depicted in dark blue colour in Figure 9. Note that transitions towards
                          left and down in the light blue coloured cells and all transitions in white coloured cells
                          have a discount value of 0.99. The observed results are similar for SARSA with transition
                          dependent discount factor. This new path is safer than the orange coloured path.




                          Figure 9. Light blue tiles are states where discount factor values are changed for transitions to-
                          wards right.

                               Thus this experiment demonstrates that by having transition dependent discount values,
                          the agent’s policy can be controlled to behave in either a risk-averse or risk-taking manner.

                          6. Discussion and Conclusions
                               The gist of transition dependent discount factor is: we push the signal from goal-states
                          more “intensely” than would otherwise be done and, therefore, be more “goal-oriented”.
                          In this paper, we introduced transition dependent Q-learning and SARSA algorithms.
                          We proved that even by having different discount factor values for all transitions, the al-
                          gorithms manage to converge to optimal. The experiments demonstrate that by setting
                          the right values of β(i, u, j), algorithms can achieve faster convergence. Another benefit
                          of transition dependent discount is more control over the policy learnt. The agent can
                          be encouraged to take risky or non-risky policy by changing the values of β(i, u, j) as
                          demonstrated in the cliff walking example. Thus, not only it can potentially speed up an
                          RL agent’s learning process, but it can also provide better control over the agent in taking
                          or avoiding risky paths.
                               In all experiments, the models with a transition dependent discount factor manage to
                          converge to optimal strategy. Finding the correct discount function is a tedious process
                          and a significant challenge that remains. Discount factor as a function also develops a
                          path that leads towards a step in the direction of an adaptive discount factor. This paper
                          concludes that the discount function is a viable choice for discounting, both theoretically
                          and experimentally.

                          Author Contributions: Conceptualization, A.S., R.G., K.L., and A.G.; methodology, validation, and
                          formal analysis, A.S., K.L. and R.G.; software, A.S. and A.G.; investigation, R.G., K.L. and A.G.;
                          resources, R.G. and A.G.; data curation, K.L. and R.G.; writing-original draft preparation, A.S., K.L.
                          and R.G.; writing—review and editing, A.S., R.G., K.L. and A.G.; visualization, A.S., R.G. and K.L.;
                          supervision, R.G., K.L. and A.G.; project administration, R.G., K.L. and A.G. All authors have read
                          and agreed to the published version of the manuscript
                          Funding: This research received no external funding.
                          Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Symmetry 2021, 13, 1197                                                                                                              15 of 16




                                   Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
                                   Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
                                   Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.    Sutton, R.S.; Barto, A.G. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction; MIT Press: Cambridge, UK, 1998; Volume 1.
2.    Adams, D.; Oh, D.H.; Kim, D.W.; Lee, C.H.; Oh, M. Deep reinforcement learning optimization framework for a power generation
      plant considering performance and environmental issues. J. Clean. Prod. 2021, 291, 125915.
3.    Vinyals, O.; Babuschkin, I.; Czarnecki, W.M.; Mathieu, M.; Dudzik, A.; Chung, J.; Choi, D.H.; Powell, R.; Ewalds, T.; Georgiev, P.;
      et al. Grandmaster level in StarCraft II using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature 2019, 575, 350–354.
4.    Napolitano, N. Testing match-3 video games with Deep Reinforcement Learning. arXiv 2020, arXiv:2007.01137.
5.    Johannink, T.; Bahl, S.; Nair, A.; Luo, J.; Kumar, A.; Loskyll, M.; Ojea, J.A.; Solowjow, E.; Levine, S. Residual reinforcement
      learning for robot control. In Proceedings of the 2019 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Montreal,
      QC, Canada, 20–24 May 2019; pp. 6023–6029.
6.    Lakshmanan, A.K.; Mohan, R.E.; Ramalingam, B.; Le, A.V.; Veerajagadeshwar, P.; Tiwari, K.; Ilyas, M. Complete coverage path
      planning using reinforcement learning for tetromino based cleaning and maintenance robot. Autom. Constr. 2020, 112, 103078.
7.    Meng, F.; Chen, P.; Wu, L.; Cheng, J. Power allocation in multi-user cellular networks: Deep reinforcement learning approaches.
      IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 2020, 19, 6255–6267.
8.    Leong, A.S.; Ramaswamy, A.; Quevedo, D.E.; Karl, H.; Shi, L. Deep reinforcement learning for wireless sensor scheduling in
      cyber–physical systems. Automatica 2020, 113, 108759.
9.    Duan, J.; Li, S.E.; Guan, Y.; Sun, Q.; Cheng, B. Hierarchical reinforcement learning for self-driving decision-making without
      reliance on labelled driving data. IET Intell. Transp. Syst. 2020, 14, 297–305.
10.   Kiran, B.R.; Sobh, I.; Talpaert, V.; Mannion, P.; Al Sallab, A.A.; Yogamani, S.; Pérez, P. Deep reinforcement learning for autonomous
      driving: A survey. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 2021, doi:10.1109/TITS.2021.3054625.
11.   Hu, B.; Li, J.; Yang, J.; Bai, H.; Li, S.; Sun, Y.; Yang, X. Reinforcement learning approach to design practical adaptive control for a
      small-scale intelligent vehicle. Symmetry 2019, 11, 1139.
12.   Watkins, C.J.; Dayan, P. Q-learning. Mach. Learn. 1992, 8, 279–292.
13.   Rummery, G.A.; Niranjan, M. On-Line Q-Learning Using Connectionist Systems; University of Cambridge, Department of
      Engineering: Cambridge, UK, 1994; Volume 37.
14.   Bertsekas, D.P. Reinforcement Learning and Optimal Control; Athena Scientific: Belmont, MA, USA, 2019.
15.   Sutton, R.S. Generalization in Reinforcement Learning: Successful Examples Using Sparse Coarse Coding. Advances in Neural
      Information Processing Systems. 1996; pp. 1038–1044. Available online: http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10
      .1.1.51.4764&rep=rep1&type=pdf (accessed on 16 June 2021).
16.   Kaelbling, L.P.; Littman, M.L.; Moore, A.W. Reinforcement learning: A survey. J. Artif. Intell. Res. 1996, 4, 237–285.
17.   Arulkumaran, K.; Deisenroth, M.P.; Brundage, M.; Bharath, A.A. Deep reinforcement learning: A brief survey. IEEE Signal
      Process. Mag. 2017, 34, 26–38.
18.   François-Lavet, V.; Fonteneau, R.; Ernst, D. How to Discount Deep Reinforcement Learning: Towards New Dynamic Strategies.
      arXiv 2015, arXiv:1512.02011.
19.   Edwards, A.; Littman, M.L.; Isbell, C.L. Expressing Tasks Robustly via Multiple Discount Factors. 2015; Volume 1. Available
      online: https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Expressing-Tasks-Robustly-via-Multiple-Discount-Edwards-Littman/3b4f5
      a83ca49d09ce3bf355be8b7e1e956dc27fe (accessed on 16 June 2021).
20.   Pitis, S. Rethinking the discount factor in reinforcement learning: A decision theoretic approach. Proc. Aaai Conf. Artif. Intell.
      2019, 33, 7949–7956.
21.   Jasso-Fuentes, H.; Menaldi, J.L.; Prieto-Rumeau, T. Discrete-time control with non-constant discount factor. Math. Methods Oper.
      Res. 2020, 92, 377–399.
22.   Wei, Q.; Guo, X. Markov decision processes with state-dependent discount factors and unbounded rewards/costs. Oper. Res.
      Lett. 2011, 39, 369–374.
23.   Groman, S.M. The Neurobiology of Impulsive Decision-Making and Reinforcement Learning in Nonhuman Animals; Springer:
      Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2020.
24.   Miyazaki, K.; Miyazaki, K.W.; Doya, K. The role of serotonin in the regulation of patience and impulsivity. Mol. Neurobiol. 2012,
      45, 213–224.
25.   Aydın, A.; Surer, E. Using Generative Adversarial Nets on Atari Games for Feature Extraction in Deep Reinforcement Learning.
      arXiv 2020, arXiv:2004.02762.
26.   Ning, Z.; Zhang, K.; Wang, X.; Obaidat, M.S.; Guo, L.; Hu, X.; Hu, B.; Guo, Y.; Sadoun, B.; Kwok, R.Y. Joint computing and
      caching in 5G-envisioned Internet of vehicles: A deep reinforcement learning-based traffic control system. IEEE Trans. Intell.
      Transp. Syst. 2020, doi:10.1109/TITS.2020.2970276.
27.   Tutsoy, O.; Brown, M. Chaotic dynamics and convergence analysis of temporal difference algorithms with bang-bang control.
      Optim. Control Appl. Methods 2016, 37, 108–126.
Symmetry 2021, 13, 1197                                                                                                        16 of 16




28.   Tutsoy, O.; Brown, M. Reinforcement learning analysis for a minimum time balance problem. Trans. Inst. Meas. Control 2016,
      38, 1186–1200.
29.   González-Hernández, J.; López-Martínez, R.; Pérez-Hernández, J. Markov control processes with randomized discounted cost.
      Math. Methods Oper. Res. 2007, 65, 27–44.
30.   Yoshida, N.; Uchibe, E.; Doya, K. Reinforcement learning with state-dependent discount factor. In Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE
      Third Joint International Conference onDevelopment and Learning and Epigenetic Robotics (ICDL), Osaka, Japan, 18–22 August
      2013; pp. 1–6.
31.   Stachurski, J.; Zhang, J. Dynamic programming with state-dependent discounting. J. Econ. Theory 2021, 192, 105190.
32.   Zhang, S.; Veeriah, V.; Whiteson, S. Learning retrospective knowledge with reverse reinforcement learning. arXiv 2020,
      arXiv:2007.06703.
33.   Hasanbeig, M.; Abate, A.; Kroening, D. Cautious reinforcement learning with logical constraints. arXiv 2020, arXiv:2002.12156.
34.   Hasanbeig, M.; Kroening, D.; Abate, A. Deep reinforcement learning with temporal logics. In International Conference on Formal
      Modeling and Analysis of Timed Systems; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2020; pp. 1–22.
35.   White, M. Unifying Task Specification in Reinforcement Learning. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on
      Machine Learning, ICML 2017, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 6–11 August 2017; pp. 3742–3750.
36.   Tsitsiklis, J.N. Asynchronous stochastic approximation and Q-learning. Mach. Learn. 1994, 16, 185–202.
37.   Jaakkola, T.; Jordan, M.I.; Singh, S.P. On the convergence of stochastic iterative dynamic programming algorithms. Neural Comput.
      1994, 6, 1185–1201.
38.   Rummery, G.A.; Niranjan, M. On-Line Q-Learning Using Connectionist Systems; Technical Report TR 166; Cambridge University
      Engineering Department: Cambridge, UK, 1994.
39.   Singh, S.; Jaakkola, T.; Littman, M.L.; Szepesvári, C. Convergence results for single-step on-policy reinforcement-learning
      algorithms. Mach. Learn. 2000, 38, 287–308.
40.   Dietterich, T.G. Hierarchical reinforcement learning with the MAXQ value function decomposition. J. Artif. Intell. Res. (JAIR)
      2000, 13, 227–303.
41.   Brockman, G.; Cheung, V.; Pettersson, L.; Schneider, J.; Schulman, J.; Tang, J.; Zaremba, W. Openai gym. arXiv 2016,
      arXiv:1606.01540.
